Student Material -
Professional.Series

EC-Councll
Official Curricula

FC-Gouncil C EH" Certified Ethical Hacker



Ethical Hacking and
Countermeasures

gf

>q } y
» ~® dS
NN,

y, Version 13



Copyright © 2024 by EC-Council. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976, no part
of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher, with the exception that the program listings may be
entered, stored, and executed in a computer system, but may not be reproduced for publication without the prior
written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain
other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to EC-Council, addressed
“Attention: EC-Council,” at the address below:

EC-Council New Mexico
101C Sun Ave NE
Albuquerque, NM 87109

Information contained in this publication has been obtained by EC-Council from sources believed to be reliable. EC-
Council takes reasonable measures to ensure that the content is current and accurate; however, because of the
possibility of human or mechanical error, we do not guarantee the accuracy, adequacy, or completeness of any
information and are not responsible for any errors or omissions nof for the accuracy of the results obtained from
use of such information.

The courseware is a result of extensive research and contributions from subject-matter experts from all over the
world. Due credits for all such contributions and references are given in the courseware in the research endnotes.
We are committed to protecting intellectual property/rights. If you are a copyright owner (an exclusive licensee or
their agent) and you believe that any part of the courseware constitutes an infringement of copyright, or a breach
of an agreed license or contract, you may notify.usat legal@eccouncil.org. In the event of a justified complaint, EC-
Council will remove the material in question and make necessary rectifications.

The courseware may contain references to other information resources and security solutions, but such references
should not be considered as an endorsement of or recommendation by EC-Council.

Readers are encouraged to report errors, omissions, and inaccuracies to EC-Council at legal@eccouncil.org. If you
have any issues, please contact us at support@eccouncil.org.

NOTICE TO THE READER
EC-Council does not warrant or guarantee any of the products, methodologies, or frameworks described herein nor
does it perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product information contained herein. EC-
Council does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that
provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that
might be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instruction
contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. EC-Council makes no
representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to the warranties of fitness for particular purpose
or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and EC-
Council takes no responsibility with respect to such material. EC-Council shall not be liable for any special,
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the reader’s use of or reliance upon this
material.

Page Il Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Foreword
Since you are reading this CEHv13 courseware, you most likely realize the importance of
information systems security. However, we would like to put forth our motive behind compiling
a resource such as this one and what you can gain from this course.

You might find yourself asking what sets this course apart from the others out there. The truth is
that no single courseware can address all the issues of information security in a detailed manner.
Moreover, the rate at which exploits, tools, and methods are being discovered by the security
community makes it difficult for one program to cover all the necessary facets of information
security. This doesn’t mean that this course is inadequate in any way as we have worked to cover
all major domains in such a manner that the reader will be able to appreciate the way security
has evolved over time as well as gain insight in to the fundamental workings relevant to each
domain. It is a blend of academic and practical wisdom supplemented with tools that the reader
can readily access in order to obtain a hands-on experience.

The emphasis throughout the courseware is on gaining practical know-how, which explains the
stress on free and accessible tools. You will read about some of the most widespread attacks
seen, the popular tools used by attackers, and how attacks have been carried out using ordinary
resources.

You may also want to know what to expect once'you have completed the course. This courseware
is a resource material. Any penetration tester can tell you that there is no one straight
methodology or sequence of steps that you can follow while auditing a client site. There is no
one template that will meet all your needs. Your testing strategy will vary with the client, the
basic information about the system or situation, and the resources at your disposal. However,
for each stage you choose — be it enumeration, firewall, penetration of other domains - you will
find something in this courseware that you can definitely use.

Finally, this is not the end! This courseware is to be considered a constant work-in-progress
because we will be adding value to this courseware over time. You may find some aspects
extremely detailed, while others may have less detail. We are constantly asking ourselves if the
content helps explain the core point of the lesson, and we constant calibrate our material with
that in mind. We would love to hear your viewpoints and suggestions so please send us your
feedback to help in our quest to constantly improve our courseware.

Page Ill Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



About the EC-Council CEH Program
If you want to stop hackers from invading your network, first you've got to invade their minds.

Computers around the world are systematically being victimized by rampant hacking. This
hacking is not only widespread, but is being executed so flawlessly that the attackers compromise
a system, steal everything of value and completely erase their tracks.

The goal of the ethical hacker is to help the organization take preemptive measures against
malicious attacks by attacking the system himself; all the while staying within legal limits. This
philosophy stems from the proven practice of trying to catch a thief, by thinking like a thief. As
technology advances and organization depend on technology increasingly, information assets
have evolved into critical components of survival.

lf hacking involves creativity and thinking ‘out-of-the-box’, then vulnerability testing and security
audits will not ensure the security proofing of an organization. To ensure that organizations have
adequately protected their information assets, they must adopt the approach of ‘defense in
depth’. In other words, they must penetrate their networks and assess the security posture for
vulnerabilities and exposure.

The Ethical Hacker is an individual who is usually employed with the organization and who can
be trusted to undertake an attempt to penetrate networks and/or computer systems using the
Same methods as a Hacker. Hacking is a felony in some countries. When it is done by request and
under a contract between an Ethical Hacker and/an organization, it is legal. The most important
point is that an Ethical Hacker has authorization.to probe the target.

The CEH Program certifies individuals in the specific network security discipline of Ethical Hacking
from a vendor-neutral perspective. The -Certified Ethical Hacker certification will fortify the
application knowledge of security officers, auditors, security professionals, site administrators,
and anyone who is concerned about the integrity of the network infrastructure. A Certified
Ethical Hacker is a skilled professional who understands and knows how to look for the
weaknesses and vulnerabilities in target systems and uses the same knowledge and tools as a
malicious hacker.

To achieve the Certified Ethical Hacker Certification, you must pass the CEH exam 312-50.

Please visit https://www.eccouncil.org/train-certify/certified-ethical-hacker-ceh/ for more
information.

Course Prerequisites

It is highly recommended that candidates pursuing this course have a _ fundamental
understanding of operating systems, file systems, computer networks, TCP/IP protocols,
information security controls, basic network troubleshooting, data leakage, data backup, and risk
management.

Page IV Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



About EC-Council
The International Council of Electronic Commerce Consultants, better known as EC-Council, was
founded in late 2001 to address the need for well-educated and certified information security
and e-business practitioners. EC-Council is a global, member-based organization composed of
industry and subject matter experts working together to set the standards and raise the bar in
information security certification and education.

EC-Council first developed the Certified Ethical Hacker (C|EH) program with the goal of teaching
the methodologies, tools, and techniques used by hackers. Leveraging the collective knowledge
of hundreds of subject-matter experts, the CEH program has rapidly gained popularity around
the world and is now delivered in more than 145 countries by more than 950 authorized training
centers. It is considered as the benchmark for many government entities and major corporations
around the globe.

EC-Council, through its impressive network of professionals and huge industry following, has also
developed a range of other leading programs in information security and e-business. EC-Council
certifications are viewed as the essential certifications needed when standard configuration and
security policy courses fall short. Providing a true, hands-on, tactical approach to security,
individuals armed with the knowledge disseminated by EC-Council programs are tightening
security networks around the world and beating hackers at their own game.

Other EC-Council Programs
Security Awareness: Certified Secure Computer User

The purpose ofthe CSCU training program is to provide students with

CSCU the necessaryknowledge and skills to protect their information assets.
This class will immerse students in an interactive learning environment
where they will acquire fundamental understanding of various

Certified Secure Computer User computer and network security threats such as identity theft, credit card
fraud, online banking phishing scams, viruses and backdoors, email hoaxes, sexual predators and
other online threats, loss of confidential information, hacking attacks, and social engineering.
More importantly, the skills learnt from the class help students take the necessary steps to
mitigate their security exposure.

~ Security: Certified Cybersecurity Technician
The Certified Cybersecurity Technician (CCT) program covers the
fundamental concepts of cybersecurity. It equips students with the skills

C ( T orenq tuhiree do rtgoa nidizeanttiiofyn 'tsh see cinucrrietya spinogs tunreet waonrdk  ismecpulerimtye tnht regaetnse rthala ts erceuflreitcyt
Certified |epecenty Technician controls to pro. tect the und. erlying . IT infrastructure from unauthorized

access, alteration, destruction, or disclosure.

Page V Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



This program gives a holistic overview of the key components of cybersecurity. The course is
designed for those interested in learning the various fundamentals of cybersecurity and aspire to
pursue a Career in cybersecurity.

Network Defense: Certified Network Defender

Students enrolled in the Certified Network Defender course will gain a

C Ni 1) dexeptaeirletidse u tnod peerrsftoarnmdi ning  roefa ln-leiftew noertkw doerfke dnesefe nansed  sditeuvaetlioopn st.h Tehire yhwainldl sg-aoinn
corttted | Network Defender the depth of technical knowledge required to actively design a secure

network within your organization. This course provides a fundamental
understanding of the true nature of data transfer, network technologies, and software
technologies so that students may understand how networks operate, how automation software
behaves, and how to analyze networks and their defense.

Students will learn how to protect, detect, and respond to the network attacks as well as learning
about network defense fundamentals, the application of network security controls, protocols,
perimeter appliances, secure IDS, VPN, and firewall configuration. Students will also learn the
intricacies of network traffic signature, analysis, and vulnerability scanning, which will help in
designing improved network security policies and successful incident response plans. These skills
will help organizations foster resiliency and operationalcontinuity during attacks.

a wD

Network Defense: Certified Cloud Security Engineer

. Certified CloudsSecurity Engineer (CCSE) course includes both vendor
neutral andwendor specific cloud security concepts. Vendor neutral

C C S E cporanccteicpetss , incltuedche nuonloivgeyr,s ally farapmpleicwaobrlek s,g aennde rparl inclcoipulde s stehcaut rity hbeelspt
Cloud Security Engineer individuals to strengthen their fundamentals. Vendor specific

concepts help individuals to gain the practical skills required when
they actually start working with a specific cloud platform. Thus, this course helps individuals in
Strengthening their fundamental cloud security knowledge and gain practical knowledge of
security practices, tools, and techniques used to configure widely used public cloud providers
such as AWS, AZURE, and GCP.

Penetration Testing: Certified Penetration Testing Professional

CPENT certification requires you to demonstrate the application of
advanced penetration testing techniques such as advanced

C PENT Windows attacks, IOT systems attacks, advanced binaries
crt | Penetration Testing Professional exploitation, exploits writing, bypassing a filtered network,

Operational Technology (OT) pen testing, accessing hidden networks
with pivoting and double pivoting, privilege escalation, and evading defense mechanisms.

Page VI Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



EC-Council’s CPENT standardizes the knowledge base for penetration testing professionals by
incorporating best practices followed by experienced experts in the field. The objective of the
CPENT is to ensure that each professional follows a strict code of ethics, is exposed to the best
practices in the domain of penetration testing and aware of all the compliance requirements
required by the industry.

Unlike a normal security certification, the CPENT credential provides an assurance that security
professionals possess skills to analyze the security posture of a network exhaustively and
recommend corrective measures authoritatively. For many years EC-Council has been certifying
IT Security Professionals around the globe to ensure these professionals are proficient in network
security defense mechanisms. EC-Council’s credentials vouch for their professionalism and
expertise thereby making these professionals more sought after by organizations and consulting
firms globally.

Computer Forensics: Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator

c . “Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator (CHFI) is a comprehensive
1 F | course covering major forensic investigation scenarios. It enables

students to acquire crucial hands-on experience with various forensic
Hacking Forensic investigation techniques. Students learn how to utilize standard

Computer
INVESTIGATOR forensic tools to successfully carry out a computer forensic

investigation, preparing them to better aid in theprosecution of perpetrators.

EC-Council’s CHFI certifies individuals in the-specific security discipline of computer forensics
from a vendor-neutral perspective. The CHFl)certification bolsters the applied knowledge of law
enforcement personnel, system administrators, security officers, defense and military personnel,
legal professionals, bankers, security professionals, and anyone who is concerned about the
integrity of network infrastructures.

Incident Handling: EC-Council Certified Incident Handler

TM —EC-Council’s Certified Incident Handler (E|CIH) program has been

FE C | H idnecsidigennetd  haanndd ldinegv ealonpde dre sinp ocnosllea bporraacttioitnio nweirths  acycbroesrss etchuer itgyl oabned.
EC-Council| Certified Incident Handler 't iS a Comprehensive specialist-level program that imparts

knowledge and skills that organizations need to effectively handle
post breach consequences by reducing the impact of the incident, from both a financial and a
reputational perspective.

E|CIH is a method-driven program that uses a holistic approach to cover vast concepts
concerning organizational incident handling and response from preparing and planning the
incident handling response process to recovering organizational assets after a security incident.
These concepts are essential for handling and responding to security incidents to protect
organizations from future threats or attacks.

Page VII Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



ae Certified Chief Information Security Officer

The Certified Chief Information Security Officer (CCISO) program was
developed by EC-Council to fill a knowledge gap in the information
security industry. Most information security certifications focus on

CCertified |. IInfosrmation Seocurity Officer specific tools or practitioner capabilities. When the CCISO program was
developed, no certification existed to recognize the knowledge, skills,

and aptitudes required for an experienced information security professional to perform the
duties of a CISO effectively and competently. In fact, at that time, many questions existed about
what a CISO really was and the value this role adds to an organization.

The CCISO Body of Knowledge helps to define the role of the CISO and clearly outline the
contributions this person makes in an organization. EC-Council enhances this information
through training opportunities conducted as instructor-led or self-study modules to ensure
candidates have a complete understanding of the role. EC-Council evaluates the knowledge of
CCISO candidates with a rigorous exam that tests their competence across five domains with
which a seasoned security leader should be familiar.

Application Security: Certified Application Security Engineer

The’ Certified Application Security Engineer
AXA AYNTN (CASE) credential is developed in

C A S E C A S ( partnership with large application and
software development experts globally.

—ere i i SeogrityyEngineer ~~ The CASE credential tests the critical
security skills and knowledge required

throughout a typical software development life cycle (SDLC), focusing on the importance of the
implementation of secure methodologies and practices in today’s insecure operating
environment.

The CASE certified training program is developed concurrently to prepare software professionals
with the necessary capabilities that are expected by employers and academia globally. It is
designed to be a hands-on, comprehensive application security course that will help software
professionals create secure applications. The training program encompasses security activities
involved in all phases of the Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC): planning, creating, testing,
and deploying an application.

Unlike other application security trainings, CASE goes beyond just the guidelines on secure coding
practices and includes secure requirement gathering, robust application design, and handling
security issues in post development phases of application development. This makes CASE one of
the most comprehensive certifications on the market today. It is desired by software application
engineers, analysts, testers globally, and respected by hiring authorities.

Page VIII Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Incident Handling: Certified Threat Intelligence Analyst

Certified Threat Intelligence Analyst (C| TIA) is designed and developed

( T | A ainc rocossll atbhoer agtloiobne  twoi thhe lcpy boergrsaenciuzartitioy nas nidd etnhtrifeya ta nidn tmelliitgigeantcee  beuxspineerstss
risks by converting unknown internal and external threats into known

cats | Threat Intelligence Analyst threats. It is a Comprehensive, specialist-level program that teaches a
structured approach for building effective threat intelligence.

In the ever-changing threat landscape, C|TIA is an essential Threat Intelligence training program
for those who deal with cyber threats on a daily basis. Organizations today demand a
professional-level cybersecurity threat intelligence analyst who can extract the intelligence from
data by implementing various advanced strategies. Such professional-level Threat Intelligence
training programs can only be achieved when the coreof the curricula maps with and is compliant
to government and industry published threat intelligence frameworks.

Incident Handling: Certified SOC Analyst

The Certified SOC Analyst (CSA) program is the first step to joining a

CSA security operations center (SOC). It is engineered for current and
aspiring Tier | and Tier Il SOC analysts to achieve proficiency in
performing entry-level and intermediate-level operations.
CSA is a training and-credentialing program that helps the candidate

Certified Analyst
acquire trending and>in-demand technical skills through instruction by

some of the most experienced trainers in(the industry. The program focuses on creating new
career opportunities through extensive, meticulous knowledge with enhanced level capabilities
for dynamically contributing to a SOC team. Being an intense 3-day program, it thoroughly covers
the fundamentals of SOC operations, before relaying the knowledge of log management and
correlation, SIEM deployment, advanced incident detection, and incident response. Additionally,
the candidate will learn to manage various SOC processes and collaborate with CSIRT at the time
of need.

Page IX Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



CEH Exam Information

CEH Exam Details

Exam Title Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH)

Exam Code 312-50

Availability EC-Council Exam Portal (please visit https://www.eccexam.com)
VUE (please visit https://home.pearsonvue.com/eccouncil)

Duration 4 Hours

Questions 125

Passing Score Please refer https://cert.eccouncil.org/faq.html

Please visit https://cert.eccouncil.org/certified-ethical-hacker.html for more information.

Page X Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Table of Contents

Module 01: Introduction to Ethical Hacking 01

Information Security Overview 04
Hacking Concepts and Hacker Classes 18
Ethical Hacking Concepts 26

Hacking Methodologies and Frameworks 45

Information Security Controls 67
Information Security Laws and Standards 98

Module 02: Footprinting and Reconnaissance 121
Footprinting Concepts 124

Footprinting through Search Engines 1a

Footprinting through Internet Research Services 157

Footprinting through Social Networking Sites 197

Whois Footprinting 2127

DNS Footprinting 219

Network and Email Footprinting 230

Footprinting through Social Engineering 247

Footprinting Tasks using Advanced Tools and Al 254
Footprinting Countermeasures 275

Module 03: Scanning Networks 279
Network Scanning Concepts 282

Host Discovery 300

Port and Service Discovery 318

OS Discovery 357
Scanning Beyond IDS and Firewall 378
Network Scanning Countermeasures 408

Module 04: Enumeration 423

Enumeration Concepts 426

NetBIOS Enumeration 434

SNMP and LDAP Enumeration 447
NTP and NFS Enumeration 467

SMTP and DNS Enumeration 478

Page XI Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EG-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Other Enumeration Techniques 511
Enumeration Countermeasures 534

Module 05: Vulnerability Analysis 543

Vulnerability Assessment Concepts 547
Vulnerability Assessment Tools 581

Vulnerability Assessment Reports 614

Module 06: System Hacking 621

Gaining Access 624

Escalating Privileges 762
Maintaining Access 824

Clearing Logs 945

Module 07: Malware Threats 997

Malware and APT Concepts 1000

Fileless Malware Concepts 1093
Al-based Malware Concepts 1111

Malware Analysis 1126

Malware Countermeasures 1245

Module 08: Sniffing 1265

Sniffing Concepts 1268
Sniffing Techniques 1284
Sniffing Tools 1356
Sniffing Countermeasures 1365

Module 09: Social Engineering 1377

Social Engineering Concepts 1380
Human-based Social Engineering Techniques 1389

Computer-based Social Engineering Techniques 1401
Mobile-based Social Engineering Techniques 1436

Social Engineering Countermeasures 1444

Module 10: Denial-of-Service 1463
DoS/DDoS Concepts 1466
DoS/DDoS Attack Techniques 1484

Page XII Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



DoS/DDoS Attack Countermeasures 1515

Module 11: Session Hijacking 1543

Session Hijacking Concepts 1546

Application-Level Session Hijacking 1558

Network-Level Session Hijacking 1581

Session Hijacking Countermeasures 1597

Module 12: Evading IDS, Firewalls, and Honeypots 1621

IDS, IPS, and Firewall Concepts 1624

IDS, IPS, and Firewall Solutions 1653

Evading IDS/Firewalls 1667

Evading NAC and Endpoint Security 1723

Honeypot Concepts and Detecting Honeypots 1763

IDS/Firewall Evasion Countermeasures 1777

Module 13: Hacking Web Servers 1787

Web Server Concepts 1790

Web Server Attacks 1812

Web Server Attack Methodology 1838

Web Server Attack Countermeasures 1885

Module 14: Hacking Web Applications 1917

Web Application Concepts 1921

Web Application Threats 1930

Web Application Hacking Methodology 2017

Web API and Webhooks 2154

Web Application Security 2205

Module 15: SQL Injection 2285

SQL Injection Concepts 2288

Types of SQL Injection 2297

SQL Injection Methodology 2311

Evasion Techniques 2400

SQL Injection Countermeasures 2416

Page XIll Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Module 16: Hacking Wireless Networks 2439

Wireless Concepts 2442
Wireless Encryption 2456

Wireless Threats 2475

Wireless Hacking Methodology 2486
Wireless Attack Countermeasures 2562

Module 17: Hacking Mobile Platforms 2579
Mobile Platform Attack Vectors 2582
Hacking Android OS 2620

Hacking iOS 2682
Mobile Device Management 2719

Mobile Security Guidelines and Tools 2732

Module 18: loT and OT Hacking 2765
lol Concepts and Attacks 2770

loT Hacking Methodology 2830

loT Attack Countermeasures 2883

OT Concepts and Attacks 2905
OT Hacking Methodology 2964
OT Attack Countermeasures 3003

Module 19: Cloud Computing 3023

Cloud Computing Concepts 3027
Cloud Computing Threats 3083
Cloud Hacking 3148
AWS Hacking 3170
Microsoft Azure Hacking 3244

Google Cloud Hacking 3275
Container Hacking 3292
Cloud Security 3310

Module 20: Cryptography 3365

Cryptography Concepts and Encryption Algorithms 3368
Applications of Cryptography 3414

Cryptanalysis Methods and Cryptography Attacks 3462
Cryptography Attack Countermeasures 3503

Page XIV Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E¢-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Glossary 3513
References 3547
Appendix A - Ethical Hacking Essential Concepts-| 3623
AppendixB - Ethical Hacking Essential Concepts- II 3743
Appendix C - Hacking Al Technologies 3833

Page XV Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.






Module
Introduction to
Ethical Hacking

EC-Councll
Official Curricula

Fe-Council C EH" Certified Ethical Hacker






Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

2 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Learning Objectives

Explain Information Security Explain Hacking Methodologies and
Concepts Frameworks

Explain Hacking Concepts and Summarize the Techniques used in
Different Hacker Classes Information Security Controls

Explain Ethical Hacking Explain the Importance of Applicable
Concepts and Scope Security Laws and Standards

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information,visit eccouncil.org

Learning Objectives

Attackers break into systems for various reasons and purposes. Therefore, it is important to
understand how malicious hackers attack and exploit systems and the probable reasons behind
these attacks. As Sun Tzu states in the Art of War, “If you know yourself but not the enemy, for
every victory gained, you will also suffenya defeat.” System administrators and security
professionals must guard their infrastructure against exploits by knowing the enemy—malicious
hackers who seek to use the same infrastructure for illegal activities.

At the endof this module, you will be able to:

= Describe the elements of information security

= Explain information security attacks and information warfare

= Describe hacking concepts and hacker classes

= Explain ethical hacking concepts and Al-driven ethical hacking

= Describe various hacking methodologies and frameworks

= Understand information security controls (information assurance, defense-in-depth, risk
management, cyber threat intelligence, threat modeling, incident management process,
and artificial intelligence (Al)/machine learning (ML))

= Understand various information security acts and laws

Module 01 Page 3 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

x Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking REETT IT HI | at

Objective

Explain Information
security Concepts

Information Security Concepts

Information security refers to the protection or safeguarding of information and information
systems that use, store, and transmit information from unauthorized access, disclosure,
alteration, and destruction. Information is a>critical asset that organizations must secure. If
sensitive information falls into the wrong(hands, then the respective organization may suffer
huge losses in terms of finances, brand.reputation, customers, or in other ways. To provide an
understanding of how to secure such critical information resources, this module starts with an
overview of information security.

This section introduces the elements of information security, classification of attacks, and
information warfare.

Module 01 Page 4 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

4 Module 01| Introductiotno Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Elements of Information Security
Information security is a state of well-being of information and infrastructure in which the possibility of theft, tampering, and disruption
of information and services is low or tolerable

Confidentiality Assurance that the information is accessible only to those authorized to have access

Integrity The trustworthiness of data or resources in terms of preventing improper or unauthorized changes

Availabili Assurance that the systems responsible for delivering, storing, and processing information are accessible
vailability when required by the authorized users

Authentiocsi ty Reefefer rs to the charaacctteerrisistitci c ofof a c ommuniiccaatitoino,n , docu ment, or any an datat hat enssuruers esththe qualitiy ty of
being genuine

A guarantee that the sender of a message cannot later deny having sent the message and that the recipient
Non-Repudiation cannot deny having received the message

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information,visit eccouncil.org

Elements of Information Security

Information security is “the state of the well-being ofinformation and infrastructure in which
the possibility of theft, tampering, or disruption. of information and services is kept low or
tolerable.” It relies on five major elements: confidentiality, integrity, availability, authenticity,
and non-repudiation.

Confidentiality

Confidentiality is the assurance that the information is accessible only to authorized.
Confidentiality breaches may occur due to improper data handling or a hacking attempt.
Confidentiality controls include data classification, data encryption, and proper disposal
of equipment (such as DVDs, USB drives, and Blu-ray discs).

Integrity

Integrity is the trustworthiness of data or resources in the prevention of improper and
unauthorized changes—the assurance that information is sufficiently accurate for its
purpose. Measures to maintain data integrity may include a checksum (a number
produced by a mathematical function to verify that a given block of data is not changed)
and access control (which ensures that only authorized people can update, add, or delete
data).

Availability

Availability is the assurance that the systems responsible for delivering, storing, and
processing information are accessible when required by authorized users. Measures to
maintain data availability can include disk arrays for redundant systems and clustered
machines, antivirus software to combat malware, and distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) prevention systems.

Module 01 Page 5 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= Authenticity

Authenticity refers to the characteristic of communication, documents, or any data that
ensures the quality of being genuine or uncorrupted. The major role of authentication is
to confirm that a user is genuine. Controls such as biometrics, smart cards, and digital
certificates ensure the authenticity of data, transactions, communications, and
documents.

= Non-Repudiation

Non-repudiation is a way to guarantee that the sender of a message cannot later deny
having sent the message and that the recipient cannot deny having received the
message. Individuals and organizations use digital signatures to ensure non-repudiation.

Module 01 Page 6 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

5 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council C\EH”

Information Security Attacks:
Motives, Goals, and Objectives
Attacks = Motive (Goal) + Method (TTP) + Vulnerability

A motive originates out of the notion that the target system stores or processes something valuable, and this leads to the threat of an
attack on the system

Attackers try various tools and attack techniques to exploit vulnerabilities in a computer system or its security policy and controls in order
to fulfil their motives

Motives behind information security attacks

= Disrupting business continuity * Propagating religious or political beliefs

= Stealing information and manipulating data « Achievinga state's military objectives
= Creating fear and chaos by disrupting critical * Damaging the reputation of the target

infrastructures « Taking revenge

«= Causing financial loss to the target * Demanding ransom

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Information Security Attacks: Motives, Goals, and Objectives

An attack is an action that is performed with the intent to breach an IT system’s security by
exploiting its vulnerabilities. An attack involves’an attempt to obtain, edit, remove, destroy,
implant, or reveal information without authorized access. It also refers to malicious software or
commands that exploit vulnerabilities to cause unanticipated behavior in legitimate software or
hardware. Therefore, an attack can be*conceptualized as combination of a motive, with a
method to perform the attack, which exploits one or more vulnerabilities in the system.

Attacks = Motive (Goal) + Method (TTP) + Vulnerability
Motives (Goals)

Attackers generally have motives (goals), and objectives behind their information security
attacks. A motive originates out of the notion that a target system stores or processes
something valuable, which leads to the threat of an attack on the system. The purpose of the
attack may be to disrupt the target organization’s business operations, to steal valuable
information for the sake of curiosity, or even to exact revenge. Therefore, these motives or
goals depend on the attacker’s state of mind, their reason for carrying out such an activity, as
well as their resources and capabilities. Once the attacker determines their goal, they can
employ various tools, attack techniques, and methods to exploit vulnerabilities in a computer
system or security policy and controls.

Motives behind information security attacks

= Disrupt business continuity

= Perform information theft

=» Manipulating data

Module 01 Page 7 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

=" Create fear and chaos by disrupting critical infrastructures

# Bring financial loss to the target

= Propagate religious or political beliefs

=" Achievea  state’s military objectives

= Damage the reputation of the target

=» Take revenge

= Demand ransom

Module 01 Page 8 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

6 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs)

Attackers attempt various attack techniques to exploit vulnerabilities in a computer system or security policy and controls to achieve
their motives

The term Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) refers to the patterns of activities and methods associated with specific threat
actors or groups of threat actors

Tactics Techniques Procedures
« “Tactics” is defined as the « “Techniques” is defined as « “Procedure” is defined as a

strategy adopted by an technical methods used by an systematic approach adopted
attacker to perform the attack attacker to achieve intermediate by threat actors to launch an
from the beginning to the end results during the attack attack

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs)

The terms “tactics, techniques, and procedures” refer to the patterns of activities and methods
associated with specific threat actors or groups’of threat actors. TTPs are helpful in analyzing
threats and profiling threat actors and can further be used to strengthen the security
infrastructure of an organization. The word “tactics” is defined as a strategy followed by an
attacker to perform the attack from the beginning to the end. The word “techniques” is defined
as the technical methods used by an attacker to achieve intermediate results during the attack.
Finally, the word “procedures” is defined as a systematic approach followed by the threat
actors to launch an attack. In order to understand and defend against the threat actors, it is
important to understand the TTPs used by adversaries. Understanding the tactics of an attacker
helps to predict and detect evolving threats in the early stages. Understanding the techniques
used by attackers helps to identify vulnerabilities and implement defensive measures in
advance. Lastly, analyzing the procedures used by the attackers helps to identify what the
attacker is looking for within the target organization’s infrastructure.

Module 01 Page 9 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

7 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Vulnerability

Common Reasons behind the
Existence of Vulnerability

Refers to the existence of weakness Hardware or software misconfiguration
in an asset that can be exploited by
threat agents

Insecure or poor design of the network and
application

Inherent technology weaknesses

Careless approach of end users

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r more information, visit eccouncil.org

Vulnerability

A vulnerability refers to a weakness in the design or bmplementation of a system that can be
exploited to compromise the security of the system. It is frequently a security loophole that
enables an attacker to enter the system by bypassing user authentication. There are generally
two main causes for vulnerable systems ina-network, software or hardware misconfiguration
and poor programming practices. Attackers exploit these vulnerabilities to perform various
types of attacks on organizational resources.

Common Reasons for the Existence of Vulnerabilities

Hardware or software misconfiguration

The insecure configuration of the hardware or software in a network can lead to
security loopholes. For example, a misconfiguration or the use of an unencrypted
protocol may lead to network intrusions, resulting in the leakage of sensitive
information. While a misconfiguration of hardware may allow attackers to obtain access
to the network or system, a misconfiguration of software may allow attackers to obtain
access to applications and data.

Insecure or poor design of network and application

An improper and insecure design of a network may make it susceptible to various
threats and potential data loss. For example, if firewalls, IDS, and virtual private network
(VPN) technologies are not implemented securely, they can expose the network to
numerous threats.

Module 01 Page 10 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

OS) WHS



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Inherent technology weaknesses

If the hardware or software is not capable of defending the network against certain
types of attacks, the network will be vulnerable to those attacks. Certain hardware,
applications, or web browsers tend to be prone to attacks such as DoS or man-in-the-
middle attacks. For example, systems running old versions of web browsers are prone to
distributed attacks. If systems are not updated, a small Trojan attack can force the user
to scan and clean the entire storage in the machine, which often leads to data loss.

End-user carelessness

End-user carelessness considerably impacts network security. Human behavior is fairly
susceptible to various types of attacks and can be exploited to effect serious outcomes,
including data loss and information leakage. Intruders can obtain sensitive information
through various social engineering techniques. The sharing of account information or
login credentials by users with potentially malicious entities can lead to the loss of data
or exploitation of the information. Connecting systems to an insecure network can also
lead to attacks from third parties.

Intentional end-user acts

Ex-employees who continue to have access to shared drives can misuse them by
revealing the company’s sensitive information. Such an act is called an intentional end-
user act and can lead to heavy data and financial losses for the company.

Examples of Vulnerabilities

The following tables summarize examples ofitechnological and configuration vulnerabilities:

Technological Vulnerabilities Description

TCP/IP protocol vulnerabilities = HTTP, FTP, ICMP, SNMP, SMTP are inherently insecure

#" AnOS can be vulnerable because:
Operating System vulnerabilities o Itis inherently insecure

o Itis not patched with the latest updates

=» Various network devices such as routers, firewall, and
switches can be vulnerable due to:
o Lack of password protection

Network Device Vulnerabilities
o Lack of authentication
Oo Insecure routing protocols
o Firewall vulnerabilities

Table 1.1: Technological Vulnerabilities

Module 01 Page 11 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Configuration Vulnerabilities Description

Originating from the insecure transmission of user
User account vulnerabilities account details such as usernames and passwords,

over the network

Originating from setting of weak passwords for system
System account vulnerabilities

accounts

Misconfiguring internet services can pose serious
security risks. For example, enabling JavaScript and

Internet service misconfiguration
misconfiguring IIS, Apache, FTP, and Terminal services,
can create security vulnerabilities in the network

Leaving the network devices/products with their
Default password and settings

default passwords and settings

Network device misconfiguration Misconfiguring the network device

Table 1.2: Configuration Vulnerabilities

Module 01 Page 12 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

8 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Classification of Attacks
Passive attacks do not tamper with the data and involve intercepting and monitoring network traffic

Passive and data flow on the target network
Attacks ; sas '

Examples include sniffing and eavesdropping

Acti Active attacks tamper with the data in transit or disrupt the communication or services between the systems
nee ‘as to bypass or break into secured systems

tacks Examples include DoS, Man-in-the-Middle, session hijacking, and SQL injection
C] ‘ Close-in attacks are performed when the attacker is in close physical proximity with the target system or network

ose-in in order to gather, modify, or disrupt access to information
Attacks Examples include social engineering such as eavesdropping, shoulder surfing, and dumpster diving

Insider attacks involve using privileged access to violate rules or intentionally cause a threat to the organization's
Insider Attacks information or information systems

Examples include theft of physical devices and planting keyloggers, backdoors, and malware

Distribution ¢ Distribution attacks occur when attackers tamper with hardware or software prior to installation

Attacks - Attackers tamper with the hardware or software at its source or in transit

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Classification of Attacks

According to IATF, security attacks are classified into>five categories: passive, active, close-in,
insider, and distribution.

= Passive Attacks

Passive attacks involve intercepting and monitoring network traffic and data flow on the
target network and do not tamper with the data. Attackers perform reconnaissance on
network activities using sniffers. These attacks are very difficult to detect as the attacker
has no active interaction with the target system or network. Passive attacks allow
attackers to capture the data or files being transmitted in the network without the
consent of the user. For example, an attacker can obtain information such as
unencrypted data in transit, clear-text credentials, or other sensitive information that is
useful in performing active attacks.

Examples of passive attacks:

o Footprinting

o Sniffing and eavesdropping

o Network traffic analysis

o Decryption of weakly encrypted traffic

=" Active Attacks

Active attacks tamper with the data in transit or disrupt communication or services
between the systems to bypass or break into secured systems. Attackers launch attacks
on the target system or network by sending traffic actively that can be detected. These

Module 01 Page 13 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

attacks are performed on the target network to exploit the information in transit. They
penetrate or infect the target’s internal network and gain access to a remote system to
compromise the internal network.

Examples of active attacks:

o Denial-of-service (DoS) attack o Firewall and IDS attack

oO Bypassing protection mechanisms o. Profiling

o Malware attacks (such as o Arbitrary code execution
viruses, worms, ransomware) o Privilege escalation

o Modification of information © Backdoor access

o Spoofing attacks o Cryptography attacks
o Replay attacks o SQLinjection
o Password-based attacks o XSS attacks

o Session hijacking o Directory traversal attacks
o Man-in-the-Middle attack o Exploitation of application and
o DNS and ARP poisoning OS software

o Compromised-key attack

Close-in Attacks

Close-in attacks are performed whén. the attacker is in close physical proximity with the
target system or network. The main goal of performing this type of attack is to gather or
modify information or disrupt its access. For example, an attacker might shoulder surf
user credentials. Attackers gain close proximity through surreptitious entry, open
access, or both.

Examples of close-in attacks:

o Social engineering (Eavesdropping, shoulder surfing, dumpster diving, and other
methods)

Insider Attacks

Insider attacks are performed by trusted persons who have physical access to the critical
assets of the target. An insider attack involves using privileged access to violate rules or
intentionally cause a threat to the organization’s information or information systems.
Insiders can easily bypass security rules, corrupt valuable resources, and access sensitive
information. They misuse the organization’s assets to directly affect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of information systems. These attacks impact the
organization’s business operations, reputation, and profit. It is difficult to figure out an
insider attack.

Module 01 Page 14 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Examples of insider attacks:

o Eavesdropping and wiretapping o Pod slurping

o Theft of physical devices o Planting keyloggers, backdoors,
or malware

o Social engineering

o Data theft and spoliation

# Distribution Attacks

Distribution attacks occur when attackers tamper with hardware or software prior to
installation. Attackers tamper the hardware or software at its source or when it is in
transit. Examples of distribution attacks include backdoors created by software or
hardware vendors at the time of manufacture. Attackers leverage these backdoors to
gain unauthorized access to the target information, systems, or network.

o Modification of software or hardware during production

o Modification of software or hardware during distribution

Module 01 Page 15 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

9 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council C\EH”

Information Warfare
The term information warfare or InfoWar refers to the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) to gain competitive
advantages over an opponent

Defensive Offensive
Information Warfare Information Warfare
Refers to all strategies and actions designed to Refers to information warfare that involves attacks
defend against attacks on ICT assets against the ICT assets of an opponent

Defensive Warfare Offensive Warfare

Prevention NI  Es N|  ie ee
ro) Deterrence FoO  & FoO  eb Application Attacks [¢y ) |

[—S" a ; Internet Web Server Attacks —

GEZ8 sia E GZS
Detection : y Malware Attacks

R R
Ao Emergency | | MITM Attacks

(ee) Preparedness : t [39]
Response : sf =f s System Hacking

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

iz

Information Warfare

Source: https://iwar.org.uk

The term information warfare or InfoWar refers to the use of information and communication
technologies (ICT) for competitive advantages over an opponent. Examples of information
warfare weapons include viruses, worms, Trojan horses, logic bombs, trap doors,
nanomachines and microbes, electroniejamming, and penetration exploits and tools.

Martin Libicki divided information warfare into the following categories:

= Command and control warfare (C2 warfare): In the computer security industry, C2
warfare refers to the impact an attacker possesses over a compromised system or
network that they control.

= Intelligence-based warfare: Intelligence-based warfare is a sensor-based technology
that directly corrupts technological systems. According to Libicki, “intelligence-based
warfare” is warfare that consists of the design, protection, and denial of systems that
seek sufficient knowledge to dominate the battlespace.

= Electronic warfare: According to Libicki, electronic warfare uses radio-electronic and
cryptographic techniques to degrade communication. Radio electronic techniques
attack the physical means of sending information, whereas cryptographic techniques
use bits and bytes to disrupt the means of sending information.

= Psychological warfare: Psychological warfare is the use of various techniques such as
propaganda and terror to demoralize one’s adversary in an attempt to succeed in battle.

Module 01 Page 16 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Hacker warfare: According to Libicki, the purpose of this type of warfare can vary from
the shutdown of systems, data errors, theft of information, theft of services, system
monitoring, false messaging, and access to data. Hackers generally use viruses, logic
bombs, Trojan horses, and sniffers to perform these attacks.

Economic warfare: Libicki notes that economic information warfare can affect the
economy of a business or nation by blocking the flow of information. This could be
especially devastating to organizations that do a lot of business in the digital world.

Cyberwarfare: Libicki defines cyber warfare as the use of information systems against
the virtual personas of individuals or groups. It is the broadest of all information
warfare. It includes information terrorism, semantic attacks (similar to Hacker warfare,
but instead of harming a system, it takes over the system while maintaining the
perception that it is operating correctly), and simula-warfare (simulated war, for
example, acquiring weapons for mere demonstration rather than actual use).

Each form of information warfare mentioned above consists of both defensive and offensive
Strategies.

Defensive Information Warfare: Involves all strategies and actions to defend against
attacks on ICT assets.

Offensive Information Warfare: Involves attacks against the ICT assets of an opponent.

Defensive Warfare Ys Offensive Warfare
Prevention cal Web Application Attac

re eb 

n A

 pplication Attakcks y

Deterrence 
a Gt 

Internet (A?
W | 

e  
b Server Attacks

Alerts 
GSN =

Detection Malware Attacks

(eABe’))  PreEpmareerdgnenecsys  MITM Attacks [SF2ie9’]
—_ . ——

System Hacking
Response f

Figure 1.1: Block Diagram of Information Warfare

Module 01 Page 17 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Qisceecom onz-

JN
S



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

10 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council at

Objective

Explain Hacking Concepts and
Different Hacker Classes

Hacking Concepts

This section deals with basic concepts of hacking: what is hacking, who is a hacker, and hacker
classes.

Module 01 Page 18 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

11 Mo04]I dntrouductlioento Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

What is Hacking?

Hacking refers to exploiting system vulnerabilities and compromising security controls to gain unauthorized
or inappropriate access to a system's resources

It involves modifying system or application features to achieve a goal outside of the creator’s original purpose

Hacking can be used to steal and redistribute intellectual property, leading to business loss ean

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

What is Hacking?

Hacking in the field of computer security refers to exploiting system vulnerabilities and
compromising security controls to gain unauthorized or inappropriate access to system
resources. It involves a modifying system or application features to achieve a goal outside its
creator’s original purpose. Hacking can be ‘done to steal, pilfer, or redistribute intellectual
property, thus leading to business loss.

Hacking on computer networks is generally done using scripts or other network programming.
Network hacking techniques include creating viruses and worms, performing denial-of-service
(DoS) attacks, establishing unauthorized remote access connections to a device using trojans or
backdoors, creating botnets, packet sniffing, phishing, and password cracking. The motive
behind hacking could be to steal critical information or services, for thrill, intellectual challenge,
curiosity, experiment, knowledge, financial gain, prestige, power, peer recognition, vengeance
and vindictiveness, among other reasons.

Module 01 Page 19 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

} GO



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

2 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Whoisa Hacker?

An intelligent individual with For some hackers, hacking is a Some hackers’ intentions can either
excellent computer skills who can hobby to see how many computers be to gain knowledge or to probe
create and explore computer or networks they can compromise and do illegal things
software and hardware

Some hack with malicious intent such as to steal business data, credit card information, social security numbers, email passwords, and
other sensitive data

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information,visit eccouncil.org

Who is a Hacker?

A hacker is a person who breaks into a system or network without authorization to destroy,
steal sensitive data, or perform malicious attacks. A hacker is an intelligent individual with
excellent computer skills, along with the ability.to create and explore the computer’s software
and hardware. Usually, a hacker is a skilled-engineer or programmer with enough knowledge to
discover vulnerabilities in a target system. They generally have subject expertise and enjoy
learning the details of various programming languages and computer systems.

For some hackers, hacking is a hobby to see how many computers or networks they can
compromise. Their intention can either be to gain knowledge or to poke around to do illegal
things. Some hack with malicious intent behind their escapades, like stealing business data,
credit card information, social security numbers, and email passwords.

Module 01 Page 20 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

8 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council C\EH"

Hacker and their Motivations
Hacker Classes Background Motivations Cyber Activity Potential Targets

Inexperienced, often young individuals
Running simple attacks like Small websites, online

Script Kiddies using pre-made scripts or tools without Thrill, recognition, fun
DDoS, defacing websites games, forums

understanding them

Improving security, salary, Conducting penetration tests, Corporations, government
White Hat Hackers Professionals in cybersecurity

reputation vulnerability assessments agencies

Individuals with extraordinary computing Financial gain, data theft, Malware creation, phishing, Financial institutions,
Black Hat Hackers

skills causing harm ransomware, data breaches individuals, enterprises

Skilled hackers operating between ethical Recognition, curiosity, Vulnerability discovery without Various, including high-profile
Gray Hat Hackers

and unethical lines financial gain permission, sometimes reported organizations

Politically or socially motivated individuals Promoting a cause, social DDoS attacks, defacing Government sites,
Hacktivists

or groups justice websites, data leaks corporations, political groups

National security,
State-Sponsored Highly trained professionals working for Cyber espionage, infrastructure Other nations' government

espionage, political
Hackers government agencies sabotage, data theft agencies, corporations

objectives

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

= vi3

4 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking -LOUNCI

Hacker and their Motivations (Cont'd)

Hacker Classes Background on CONrotivations Cyber Activity Potential Targets

Cyber attacks on critical
Extremists using cyber attacks to Spreading fear, political or Critical infrastructure, public

Cyber Terrorists infrastructure, spreading
promote political or religious beliefs ideological goals services

propaganda

Corporate Spies Individuals hired by companies to gather Financial gain, competitive Industrial espionage, data theft,
Competitor companies

(Industrial Spies) intelligence on competitors advantage spying

Security professionals hired temporarily Improving product security, Conducting security audits, Technology companies,
Blue Hat Hackers

to test systems before product release reputation penetration testing software firms

Vigilantes targeting black hat hackers Cyber justice, disrupting Hacking black hat infrastructure, Cybercriminal groups, black
Red Hat Hackers

using aggressive methods malicious activities disabling malicious networks hat hackers

Newcomers eager to learn hacking skills,
Learning, curiosity, Learning hacking techniques, Various, typically low-risk

Green Hat Hackers often participating in online forums and
recognition experimenting with simple attacks targets

communities

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Hacker and their Motivations

Hackers usually fall into one of the following categories, according to their activities:

=" Script Kiddies: Script kiddies are unskilled hackers who compromise systems by running
scripts, tools, and software developed by real hackers. They usually focus on the
quantity rather than the quality of the attacks that they initiate. They do not have a

Module 01 Page 21 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

specific target or goal in performing the attack and simply aim to gain popularity or
prove their technical skills.

=» White Hat Hackers: White hats or penetration testers are individuals who use their
hacking skills for defensive purposes. These days, almost every organization has security
analysts who are knowledgeable about hacking countermeasures, which can secure its
network and information systems against malicious attacks. They have permission from
the system owner.

= Black Hat Hackers: Black hats are individuals who use their extraordinary computing
Skills for illegal or malicious purposes. This category of hacker is often involved in
criminal activities. They are also known as crackers.

=" Gray Hat Hackers: Gray hats are the individuals who work both offensively and
defensively at various times. Gray hats might help hackers to find various vulnerabilities
in a system or network and, at the same time, help vendors to improve products
(software or hardware) by checking limitations and making them more secure.

=" Hacktivists: Hacktivism is a form of activism in which hackers break into government or
corporate computer systems as an act of protest. Hacktivists use hacking to increase
awareness of their social or political agendas, as well as to boost their own reputations
in both online and offline arenas. They promoté a political agenda especially by using
hacking to deface or disable websites. In some incidents, hacktivists may also obtain and
reveal confidential information to the\public. Common hacktivist targets include
government agencies, financial institutions, multinational corporations, and any other
entity that they perceive as a threat.‘rrespective of hacktivists’ intentions, the gaining
of unauthorized access is a crime:

= State-Sponsored Hackers: State-sponsored hackers are skilled individuals having
expertise in hacking and are employed by the government to penetrate, gain top-secret
information from, and damage the information systems of other government or military
organizations. The main aim of these threat actors is to detect vulnerabilities in and
exploit a nation’s infrastructure and gather intelligence or sensitive information.

= Cyber Terrorists: Cyber terrorists are individuals with a wide range of skills, motivated
by religious or political beliefs, to create fear of large-scale disruption of computer
networks.

= Corporate Spies (Industrial Spies): Industrial spies are individuals who perform
corporate espionage by illegally spying on competitor organizations. They focus on
Stealing critical information such as blueprints, formulas, product designs, and trade
secrets. These threat actors use advanced persistent threats (APTs) to penetrate a
network and can also stay undetected for years. In some cases, they may use social
engineering techniques to steal sensitive information such as development plans and
marketing strategies of the target company, which can result in financial loss to that
company.

Module 01 Page 22 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Blue Hat Hackers: Blue hats are contract-based cybersecurity professionals hired by
organizations to evaluate systems or software for vulnerabilities. They conduct security
assessments, penetration testing, and vulnerability analyses to ensure that weaknesses
are addressed before malicious actors could exploit them.

Red Hat Hackers: Red hats adopt aggressive tactics, such as black hat hackers, with the
intent of neutralizing threats before damaging resources. They not only identify and
report vulnerabilities but also take active measures to destroy black-hat activities, often
going beyond mere defense to prevent security breaches. Their approach is more
proactive, similar to white hat hackers, but they do not follow ethical rules to take down
black hat hackers.

Green Hat Hackers: Green hat hackers are individuals motivated by the desire to
become skilled professionals in the field of cybersecurity. They often spend time
studying and practicing ethical hacking aiming to contribute to security efforts rather
than causing harm.

Suicide Hackers: Suicide hackers are individuals who aim to bring down critical
infrastructure for a “cause” and are not worried about facing jail terms or any other kind
of punishment. Suicide hackers are similar to suicide bombers who sacrifice their life for
an attack and are thus not concerned with the consequences of their actions.

Hacker Teams: A hacker team is a consortium of skilled hackers having their own
resources and funding. They work together in synergy for researching state-of-the-art
technologies. These threat actors can also detect vulnerabilities, develop advanced
tools, and execute attacks with properplanning.

Insiders: An insider is any employee (trusted person) who has access to critical assets of
an organization. An insider threat involves the use of privileged access to violate rules or
intentionally cause harm to the organization’s information or information systems.
Insiders can easily bypass security rules, corrupt valuable resources, and access sensitive
information. Generally, insider threats arise from disgruntled employees, terminated
employees, and undertrained staff members.

Criminal Syndicates: Criminal syndicates are groups of individuals or communities that
are involved in organized, planned, and prolonged criminal activities. They exploit
victims from distinct jurisdictions on the Internet, making them difficult to locate. The
main aim of these threat actors is to illegally embezzle money by performing
sophisticated cyber-attacks and money-laundering activities.

Organized Hackers: Organized hackers are a group of hackers working together in
criminal activities. Such groups are well organized in a hierarchical structure consisting
of leaders and workers. The group can also have multiple layers of management. These
hackers are miscreants or hardened criminals who do not use their own devices; rather,
they use rented devices or botnets and crimeware services to perform various cyber-
attacks to pilfer money from victims and sell their information to the highest bidder.
They can also swindle intellectual property, trade secrets, and marketing plans; covertly
penetrate the target network; and remain undetected for long periods.

Module 01 Page 23 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Here is a table that lists different types of hackers, their backgrounds, motivations, gains,
cyber/hacking activities, and potential targets:

Hacker oe sa :
Background Motivations Cyber Activity Potential Targets

Classes

Inexperienced, often
Gara young individuals using Thrill, Running simple Small websites,

j p pre-made scripts or tools | recognition, attacks like DDoS, online games,
Kiddies :

without understanding fun defacing websites forums
them

Improving Conducting .
Whi: te Hat | Professi' onals in security, penetration tests, CorpPorations,

. wp government
Hackers cybersecurity Salary, vulnerability ;

agencies
reputation assessments

yi ’ Malware creation, Financial
Individuals with Financial gain, iy. ae

Black Hat phishing, institutions,
extraordinary computing | data theft, sae

Hackers , . ransomware, data individuals,
Skills causing harm

breaches enterprises

Skilled hackers operati; ng | Recogni=ti on, ‘on In©e raabilyi  Various, ;i ncludi;ng
Gray Hat 4 discovery without ;

between ethical and Curiosity, a high-profile
Hackers ' permission, —om

unethical lines financiahgain organizations
sometimes reported

_ , ’ Government
Politically or socially Promoting a DDoS attacks, ginse

Hacktivists | motivated individuals or ‘cause, social defacing websites, sis
ae corporations,

groups justice data leaks A
political groups

National
State- Hi, ghly trained security, Cyber espionage, ethheer r nnaatiuoonnss ’

; . ; ; government
Sponsored| professionals working for | espionage, infrastructure agencies
Hackers government agencies political sabotage, data theft ‘

— corporations
objectives

Extremi: sts using cyber Spread;i, ng fear, in r oon ks on ae
- critical Critical

Cyber attacks to promote political or ,
; a a. infrastructure, infrastructure,

Terrorists political or religious ideological , .
spreading public services

beliefs goals
propaganda

Corporate — Individuals hired by , ,
: Financial gain, ;

Spies companies to gather saith Industrial espionage, |Competitor
(Industrial | intelligence on P data theft, spying companies
Spi5e s) competitors advantage

Module 01 Page 24 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Security professionals Improving
. , Conducting security | Technology

Blue Hat hired temporarily to test | product ,
; audits, penetration companies,

Hackers systems before product security, ; ;
. testing software firms

release reputation

Vigilantes targeting black Cyy ber ju. stice, .H acking 5 black hat Cybercriminal
Red Hat disrupting infrastructure,

hat hackers using ie ae i groups, black hat
Hackers malicious disabling malicious

aggressive methods oe hackers
activities networks

Newcomers eager to Learnin Learning hacking
Green Hat | learn hacking skills, often Sato = techniques, Various, typically
Hackers participating in online " experimenting with | low-risk targets

is recognition
forums and communities simple attacks

Table 1.3: Types of hackers

Module 01 Page 25 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

6 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council at

Objective

Explain Ethical Hacking
Concepts and Scope

Ethical Hacking Concepts

An ethical hacker follows processes similar to those of a malicious hacker. The steps to gain and
maintain access to a computer system are similar irrespective of the hacker’s intentions.

This section provides an overview of ethical hacking, why ethical hacking is necessary, the scope
and limitations of ethical hacking, and the skills of an ethical hacker.

Module 01 Page 26 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

6 Mo01|I dntrouductlioent o  Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

What is Ethical Hacking?

Ethical hacking involves the use of hacking tools, tricks, and techniques to identify vulnerabilities and ensure cha
system security =

It focuses on simulating the techniques used by attackers to verify the existence of exploitable vulnerabilities oe
in a system’s security CEO

—

Ethical hackers perform security assessments for an organization with the permission of concerned authorities

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

What is Ethical Hacking?

Ethical hacking is the practice of employing computer and network skills in order to assist
organizations in testing their network security for.possible loopholes and vulnerabilities. White
Hats (also known as security analysts or ethical hackers) are the individuals or experts who
perform ethical hacking. Nowadays, mest organizations (such as private companies,
universities, and government organizations) are hiring White Hats to assist them in enhancing
their cybersecurity. They perform hacking in ethical ways, with the permission of the network
or system owner and without the intention to cause harm. Ethical hackers report all
vulnerabilities to the system and network owner for remediation, thereby increasing the
security of an organization’s information system. Ethical hacking involves the use of hacking
tools, tricks, and techniques typically used by an attacker to verify the existence of exploitable
vulnerabilities in system security.

Today, the term hacking is closely associated with illegal and unethical activities. There is
continuing debate as to whether hacking can be ethical or not, given the fact that unauthorized
access to any system is a crime. Consider the following definitions:

=» The noun “hacker” refers to a person who enjoys learning the details of computer
systems and stretching their capabilities.

= The verb “to hack” describes the rapid development of new programs or the reverse
engineering of existing software to make it better or more efficient in new and
innovative ways.

=» The terms “cracker” and “attacker” refer to persons who employ their hacking skills for
offensive purposes.

Module 01 Page 27 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= The term “ethical hacker” refers to security professionals who employ their hacking
Skills for defensive purposes.

Most companies employ IT professionals to audit their systems for known vulnerabilities.
Although this is a beneficial practice, crackers are usually more interested in using newer,
lesser-known vulnerabilities, and so these by-the-numbers system audits do not suffice. A
company needs someone who can think like a cracker, keep up with the newest vulnerabilities
and exploits, and recognize potential vulnerabilities where others cannot. This is the role of the
ethical hacker.

Ethical hackers usually employ the same tools and techniques as hackers, with the important
exception that they do not damage the system. They evaluate system security, update the
administrators regarding any discovered vulnerabilities, and recommend procedures for
patching those vulnerabilities.

The important distinction between ethical hackers and crackers is consent. Crackers attempt to
gain unauthorized access to systems, while ethical hackers are always completely open and
transparent about what they are doing and how they are doing it. Ethical hacking is, therefore,
always legal.

Module 01 Page 28 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

7 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Why Ethical Hacking is Necessary
To beat a hacker, you need to think like one!

Ethical hacking is necessary as it allows for counter attacks against malicious hackers through anticipating the methods used to
break into the system

Reasons why organizations recruit ethical hackers

To prevent hackers from gaining access to the To provide adequate preventive measures in order to
organization’s information systems avoid security breaches

To uncover vulnerabilities in systems and explore their
potential as a security risk To help safeguard customer data

To analyze and strengthen an organization’s security
To enhance security awareness at all levels ina

posture, including policies, network protection
infrastructure, and end-user practices business

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Why Ethical Hacking is Necessary

As technology is growing at a faster pace, so is the growth in the risks associated with it. To
beat a hacker, it is necessary to think like one!

Ethical hacking is necessary as it allows “to counter attacks from malicious hackers by
anticipating methods used by them to.break into a system. Ethical hacking helps to predict
various possible vulnerabilities well invadvance and rectify them without incurring any kind of
outside attack. As hacking involves creative thinking, vulnerability testing, and security audits
alone cannot ensure that the network is secure. To achieve security, organizations must
implement a “defense-in-depth” strategy by penetrating their networks to estimate and expose
vulnerabilities.

Reasons why organizations recruit ethical hackers

= To prevent hackers from gaining access to the organization’s information systems

= To uncover vulnerabilities in systems and explore their potential as a risk

= To analyze and strengthen an organization’s security posture, including policies,
network protection infrastructure, and end-user practices

= To provide adequate preventive measures in order to avoid security breaches

= To help safeguard the customer data

= To enhance security awareness at all levels in a business

Module 01 Page 29 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

An ethical hacker’s evaluation of a client’s information system security seeks to answer three
basic questions:

1. What can an attacker see on the target system?

Normal security checks by system administrators will often overlook vulnerabilities. The
ethical hacker has to think about what an attacker might see during the reconnaissance
and scanning phases of an attack.

2. What can an intruder do with that information?

The ethical hacker must discern the intent and purpose behind attacks to determine
appropriate countermeasures. During the gaining-access and maintaining-access phases
of an attack, the ethical hacker needs to be one step ahead of the hacker in order to
provide adequate protection.

3. Are the attackers’ attempts being noticed on the target systems?

Sometimes attackers will try to breach a system for days, weeks, or even months. Other
times they will gain access but will wait before doing anything damaging. Instead, they
will take the time to assess the potential use of exposed information. During the
reconnaissance and covering tracks phases, the ethical hacker should notice and stop
the attack.

After carrying out attacks, hackers may clear their tracks by modifying log files and creating
backdoors, or by deploying trojans. Ethical hackers must investigate whether such activities
have been recorded and what preventive measures have been taken. This not only provides
them with an assessment of the attacker’s, proficiency but also gives them insight into the
existing security measures of the system being evaluated. The entire process of ethical hacking
and subsequent patching of discoveredwulnerabilities depends on questions such as:

# What is the organization trying to protect?

=» Against whom or what are they trying to protect it?

=" Areall the components of the information system adequately protected, updated, and
patched?

= How much time, effort, and money is the client willing to invest to gain adequate
protection?

= Do the information security measures comply with industry and legal standards?

Sometimes, in order to save on resources or prevent further discovery, the client might decide
to end the evaluation after the first vulnerability is found; therefore, it is important that the
ethical hacker and the client work out a suitable framework for investigation beforehand. The
client must be convinced of the importance of these security exercises through concise
descriptions of what is happening and what is at stake. The ethical hacker must also remember
to convey to the client that it is never possible to guard systems completely, but that they can
always be improved.

Module 01 Page 30 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

18 Mo01| Idntrouductlioent o  Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Scope and Limitations of Ethical Hacking

Scope Limitations

¢ Ethical hacking is a crucial component of risk * Unless the businesses already know what they
assessment, auditing, counter fraud, and are looking for and why they are hiring an
information systems security best practices outside vendor to hack systems in the first

place, chances are there would not be much to
It is used to identify risks and highlight gain from the experience
remedial actions. It also reduces ICT costs
by resolving vulnerabilities ¢ An ethical hacker can only help the organization

to better understand its security system; it is
up to the organization to place the right
safeguards on the network

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Scope and Limitations of Ethical Hacking

Security experts broadly categorize computer crimes into two categories: crimes facilitated by a
computer and those in which the computer is thestarget.

Ethical hacking is a structured and organized security assessment, usually as part of a
penetration test or security audit, and. is.a’ crucial component of risk assessment, auditing,
counter fraud, and information systems security best practices. It is used to identify risks and
highlight remedial actions. It is also used to reduce Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) costs by resolving vulnerabilities.

Ethical hackers determine the scope of the security assessment according to the client’s
security concerns. Many ethical hackers are members of a “Tiger Team.” A tiger team works
together to performa full-scale test covering all aspects of the network, as well as physical and
system intrusion.

An ethical hacker should know the penalties of unauthorized hacking into a system. No ethical
hacking activities associated with a network-penetration test or security audit should begin
before receiving a signed legal document giving the ethical hacker express permission to
perform the hacking activities from the target organization. Ethical hackers must be judicious
with their hacking skills and recognize the consequences of misusing those skills.

The ethical hacker must follow certain rules to fulfill their ethical and moral obligations. They
must do the following:

=" Gain authorization from the client and have a signed contract giving the tester
permission to perform the test.

Module 01 Page 31 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Maintain confidentiality when performing the test and follow a Nondisclosure
Agreement (NDA) with the client for the confidential information disclosed during the
test. The information gathered might contain sensitive information, and the ethical
hacker must not disclose any information about the test or the confidential company
data toa third party.

Perform the test up to but not beyond the agreed-upon limits. For example, ethical
hackers should perform DoS attacks only if they have previously agreed upon this with
the client. Loss of revenue, goodwill, and worse consequences could befall an
organization whose servers or applications are unavailable to customers because of the
testing.

The following steps provide a framework for performing a security audit of an organization,
which will help in ensuring that the test is organized, efficient, and ethical:

Talk to the client and discuss the needs to be addressed during the testing

Prepare and sign NDA documents with the client

Organize an ethical hacking team and prepare the schedule for testing

Conduct the test

Analyze the results of the testing and prepare.a report

Present the report findings to the client

However, there are limitations too. Unless the\businesses first know what they are looking for
and why they are hiring an outside vendor*to-hack their systems in the first place, chances are
there would not be much to gain from experience. An ethical hacker, thus, can only help the
organization to better understand its SeCurity system. It is up to the organization to place the
right safeguards on the network.

Module 01 Page 32 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

79 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Skills of an Ethical Hacker

Technical Skills Non-Technical Skills
* In-depth knowledge of major operating * The ability to learn and adopt new

environments such as Windows, Unix, Linux, and technologies quickly
Macintosh

¢ Strong work ethics and good problem
In-depth knowledge of networking concepts, solving and communication skills
technologies, and related hardware and software - Committed to the organization’s security

A computer expert adept at technical domains policies
Knowledgeable about security areas and related * An awareness of local standards and laws
issues

“High technical” knowledge for launching
sophisticated attacks

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Skills of an Ethical Hacker

It is essential for an ethical hacker to acquire the knowledge and skills to become an expert
hacker and to use this knowledge in a lawful manner. The technical and non-technical skills to
be a good ethical hacker are discussed below:

# Technical Skills

O In-depth knowledge of major operating environments, such as Windows, Unix,
Linux, and Macintosh

In-depth knowledge of networking concepts, technologies, and related hardware
and software

A computer expert adept at technical domains

) The knowledge of security areas and related issues

O High technical knowledge of how to launch sophisticated attacks

= Non-Technical Skills

o The ability to quickly learn and adapt new technologies

o Astrong work ethic and good problem solving and communication skills

o Commitment to an organization’s security policies

o Anawareness of local standards and laws

Module 01 Page 33 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

20 Mo01|I dntrouductlioent o  Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Al- Driven Ethical Hacking

Advancements in Al have led to more sophisticated cyber threats, as hackers increasingly use Al-driven tools to
enhance and automate their attacks, presenting significant challenges to cybersecurity

Al-driven ethical hacking is a modern approach to cybersecurity where artificial intelligence (Al) technologies
are used to enhance the capabilities of ethical hackers

Leveraging Al in ethical hacking enables professionals to anticipate emerging threats, outpace malicious actors,
and proactively mitigate risks

Al-driven ethical hacking involves use of Al technologies such as Al algorithms, machine learning models,
and automation frameworks to facilitate and automate ethical hacking efforts

Benefits: 1. Efficiency 2. Accuracy 3. Scalability 4. Cost-Effectiveness

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Al-Driven Ethical Hacking

In today's rapidly evolving landscape, artificial intelligence (Al) has emerged as a transformative
force across diverse fields, shaping various sectors, revolutionizing processes, and enhancing
efficiency. With the advancement of Al, cyberthreats have become more sophisticated. Hackers
are increasingly leveraging Al-driven tools-and techniques to automate and augment hacking
attempts, posing significant challenges tocybersecurity.

Al-driven ethical hacking is a modern approach to cybersecurity where artificial intelligence (Al)
technologies are used to enhance the capabilities of ethical hackers. Ethical hacking, also
known as penetration testing, involves identifying and exploiting vulnerabilities in a system to
improve security. Ethical hacking is more efficient, scalable, and effective when combined with
Al.

This strategic adoption of Al technologies presents a transformative opportunity for ethical
hackers to enhance their capabilities, strengthen their cybersecurity defenses, and effectively
mitigate emerging cyber threats. Using Al technologies in ethical hacking endeavors, ethical
hackers empower themselves to stay ahead of malicious actors, anticipate evolving attack
vectors, and proactively mitigate risks.

Al-driven ethical hacking involves the use of Al technologies, such as Al algorithms, machine
learning models, and automation frameworks, to facilitate and automate ethical hacking
efforts. By embracing Al-driven approaches, ethical hackers can not only enhance the efficiency
and efficacy of their cybersecurity efforts but also contribute to fostering a safer and more
resilient digital ecosystem.

Module 01 Page 34 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Benefits

Efficiency: Al can quickly process large amounts of data, making the ethical hacking
process faster and more efficient.

Accuracy: Al reduces the likelihood of human error and increases the accuracy of
vulnerability assessments.

Scalability: Al-driven solutions can be scaled to handle the growing complexity and
volume of cyberthreats.

Cost-Effectiveness: Automation and efficiency gains can reduce the overall costs of
cybersecurity.

Applications of Al-Driven Ethical Hacking

Network Security: Monitoring network traffic for suspicious activities and potential
breaches.

Application Security: Testing Web and mobile applications for vulnerabilities using Al-
powered tools.

Cloud Security: Identifying and mitigating risks in cloud environments.

loT Security: Protecting Internet of Things (loT) devices from cyber threats.

Threat Intelligence: Gathering and analyzing threat data to provide actionable insights.

Module 01 Page 35 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

21 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

How Al- Driven Ethical Hacking Helps
Ethical Hacker?
Al-driven ethical hacking enhances the efficiency, effectiveness, and scope of cybersecurity measures, providing ethical hackers with
powerful tools to safeguard digital assets against increasingly sophisticated cyber threats

(1) Automation of Repetitive Tasks (6) Enhanced Reporting

(2) Predictive Analysis (7) Simulation and Testing

(3) Advanced Threat Detection Scalability

(4) Enhanced Decision Making (9) Continuous Monitoring

(5) Adaptive Learning Adaptive Defense Mechanisms
Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

How AlI-Driven Ethical Hacking Helps Ethical Hacker?

Al-driven ethical hacking leverages artificial intelligence (Al) technologies to enhance the
capabilities of ethical hackers. Al-driven ethical hacking enhances the efficiency, effectiveness,
and scope of cybersecurity measures and provides ethical hackers with powerful tools to
Safeguard digital assets against increasingly’sophisticated cyber threats.

Automation of Repetitive Tasks: Al can automate the repetitive tasks involved in ethical
hacking, such as scanning vulnerabilities, monitoring network traffic, and identifying
potential threats. This reduces the time and effort required for manual testing and
allows ethical hackers to focus on more complex tasks.

Predictive Analysis: Al algorithms can predict potential security breaches by analyzing
data patterns and anomalies. Machine learning models can learn from past attacks to
identify signs of future threats, thereby providing a proactive approach to cybersecurity.
This helps ethical hackers proactively address vulnerabilities before they can be
exploited by malicious actors.

Advanced Threat Detection: Al-driven tools can detect sophisticated and previously
unknown threats (zero-day vulnerabilities) using deep learning and anomaly-detection
techniques. These tools can identify subtle indicators of compromise that traditional
methods can miss.

Enhanced Decision Making: Al tools can provide insights and recommendations based
on data analysis, which aid ethical hackers in making informed decisions about where to
allocate resources and how to respond to threats.

Module 01 Page 36 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= Adaptive Learning: Al systems continuously learn and adapt to new types of
cyberattacks. As cyber threats evolve, Al can update its knowledge base and improve its
detection and response strategies without requiring manual intervention.

= Enhanced Reporting: Al can generate detailed and accurate reports on vulnerabilities
and their potential impact. These reports can help organizations prioritize their security
efforts and allocate resources more effectively.

= Simulation and Testing: Al-driven ethical hacking tools can simulate real-world
cyberattacks and test the resilience of a system. These simulations help organizations
understand how their defenses would perform under actual attack conditions and
identify areas for improvement.

=" Scalability: Al-driven tools can handle large-scale environments and complex systems
more efficiently than manual methods can. This scalability is crucial for organizations
with extensive and diverse IT infrastructure.

= Continuous Monitoring: Al enables the continuous monitoring and assessment of
security postures, ensuring that vulnerabilities are identified and mitigated in real time
rather than during periodic reviews.

= Adaptive Defense Mechanisms: Al can adapt to new threats as they evolve, updating its
algorithms and response strategies to counteract the latest hacking techniques and
exploitations.

Module 01 Page 37 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

ee Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Myth: Al will Replace Ethical Hackers

Ai-driven ethical hacking is one of the valuable tool in the arsenal of ethical hackers, and not a replacement

While Al technologies can automate certain aspects of ethical hacking tasks and improve efficiency, human
expertise, creativity, and critical thinking remain indispensable in cybersecurity

Ethical hacking involves a complex and dynamic interplay of technical skills, domain knowledge, and ethical
considerations that go beyond the capabilities of Al systems alone

Ethical hackers possess a deep understanding of systems and networks, as well as the ability to think like
attackers, identify vulnerabilities, and craft effective mitigation strategies

Although Al-driven ethical hacking can assist ethical hackers by automating routine tasks. However, Human
oversight is essential to interpret results, validate findings, and make informed judgments based on contextual
knowledge and ethical principles

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

Myth: AI will Replace Ethical Hackers

Al-driven ethical hacking is undoubtedly a powerful tool within the arsenal of ethical hackers,
but it is crucial to recognize that it does not operate in isolation; rather, it complements, rather
than replaces, human expertise.

While Al technologies can automate certain aspects of ethical hacking tasks and
significantly enhance efficiency,;they cannot replace the creativity, critical thinking, and
complex knowledge that human ethical hackers bring to tables.

Ethical hacking involves determining how digital objects work and making them safer. It
is like solving a puzzle in which you explore the computer staff and networks. You need
to know about different software and hardware, and be ready for new challenges. The
following rules and laws are as important as identifying problems:

Although artificial intelligence (Al) tools can make the hacking process faster and easier,
they are imperfect. Humans need to oversee them, ensure they are working correctly,
and interpret the results. Sometimes, ethical hacking involves making difficult decisions
where strict rules may not apply; that is, where human judgment becomes crucial.
Humans can think of attackers, identify potential points of entry, and exploit
vulnerabilities in ways that Al systems may struggle to comprehend. Moreover, ethical
human hackers can leverage their knowledge and contextual understanding to craft
tailored mitigation strategies to address the specific needs and challenges of a given
system or network.

Al-driven ethical hacking is beneficial for cybersecurity; however, it should not replace
human hackers. When Al and humans work together, organizations can improve their
cybersecurity and protect themselves against different threats. This combination of

Module 01 Page 38 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

human creativity and technology can improve ethical hacking and cybersecurity better
in the future.

Module 01 Page 39 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

23. Module 04]I ntrodtouB hcicatl Hiaockinng EC-Council CEH”

ChatGPT- Powered AI Tools for Ethical Hackers
ChatGPT-Powered Al Tools leverage the capabilities of OpenAl's ChatGPT model to assist ethical hackers in various aspects
of their work

Features of ChatGPT-Powered Al Tools
An Al-powered tool that ethical hackers and cybersecurity

ShellGPT professionals can use to perform various tasks
Configure and collect data from a wide range of sources,
including social media, forums, websites, and public
databases

By using natural language processing (NLP) and machine
learning, provide real-time assistance, automate tasks, and
enhance the capabilities of security professionals

Integration with threat intelligence databases to provide
context and additional information about identified threats

ChatGPT-Powered HackerGPT PentestGPT Bug Hunter GPT h4ckGPT Ethical Hacker GPT
Al Tools: https://chat.hackerai.co https://github.com https://chatgpt.com https://chatgpt.com https://chatgpt.com

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

ChatGPT-Powered AI Tools for Ethical Hackers

ChatGPT-Powered Al Tools leverage the capabilities of OpenAl's ChatGPT model to
revolutionize ethical hacking. By integrating NLP and machine learning, these tools assist ethical
hackers in various aspects of their work, thereby enhancing their efficiency, accuracy, and
overall effectiveness in identifying and mitigating cybersecurity threats.

Key Features:

= Data Collection and Configuration: ChatGPT-powered tools can configure and collect
data from a wide range of data sources, such as social media platforms, forums,
websites, and public databases, to enhance their ability to identify potential
vulnerabilities.

= Real-Time Assistance and Task Automation: Utilizing advanced NLP and machine
learning techniques, ChatGPT-powered tools can automate various tasks such as
vulnerability scanning, threat analysis, and reporting, thereby streamlining the workflow
of security professionals.

# Integration with Threat Intelligence Databases: ChatGPT-powered tools are integrated
with threat intelligence databases, providing ethical hackers with valuable context and
additional information regarding the identified threats. This integration enhances the
accuracy and relevance of the threat analysis, enabling ethical hackers to make
informed decisions and respond effectively to potential security breaches.

Module 01 Page 40 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Examples:

As ShellGPT: ShellGPT is an Al-powered tool that enhances accuracy in managing complex
systems, writing secure code, and automating repetitive tasks, such as a variety of shell
and command-line tasks.

Features of ShellGPT:

o Generating Shell Commands: Provides the necessary commands to help you
navigate through complex systems effortlessly.

o Completing Shell Commands: It suggest completions to ensure accurate and
efficient command execution.

o Writing Code Snippets: Assists in generating secure code in various programming
languages to enhance hacking toolkit

o Creating Comments and Documentation: Explains intricate code blocks and scripts,
making collaboration smoother and code releases more readable, user-friendly, and
transparent

o Answering General Questions: Gives answers to the queries directly in the terminal

Figure 1.2: Screenshot of ShellGPT

2. AutoGPT: AutoGPT is an Al-powered tool designed to automate task execution and data
processing. It leverages the capabilities of advanced Al models to generate actionable
insights, streamline workflows, and enhance decision-making processes in various
domains including cybersecurity.

WormGPT: WormGPT is an Al-powered tool that assists cybersecurity professionals in
automating the generation of worm-like scripts and payloads. It leverages Al to create
sophisticated malware for testing and defense purposes, ensuring that robust security
measures are in place.

ChatGPT with DAN prompt: ChatGPT with DAN Prompt is a customized version of
ChatGPT that utilizes the DAN (Do Anything Now) prompt to enhance its capabilities.
This tool enables ethical hackers to perform a wide range of tasks by leveraging the
flexibility and power of DAN prompts.

Module 01 Page 41 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EG-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

5. FreedomGPT: FreedomGPT is an Al tool designed to provide ethical hackers with
unrestricted access to Al. It aims to bypass traditional content filters and restrictions,
allowing users to explore a wide range of functionalities and information.

FraudGPT: FraudGPT is an Al tool specifically designed to detect and prevent fraudulent
activities. It leverages machine learning and Al to analyze patterns, identify suspicious
behaviors, and provide actionable insights to mitigate fraud.

ChaosGPT: ChaosGPT is an Al tool designed to simulate and understand chaotic and
unpredictable behaviors.

PoisonGPT: PoisonGPT is an Al-powered tool that introduces malicious models into
otherwise trusted Al systems. It is used to study and understand the implications of Al
model poisoning, helping develop defenses against such attacks.

Applications and Benefits:

Enhanced Security Posture: By leveraging the advanced capabilities of ChatGPT, these
Al tools significantly enhance an organization’s security posture. Ethical hackers can
identify and mitigate threats efficiently, thereby ensuring robust protection against
cyberattacks.

Operational Efficiency: Automation of routine tasks and real-time assistance provided
by ChatGPT-powered tools increase the operational efficiency of ethical hackers. This
allows them to perform more comprehensivesrsecurity assessments in a shorter time.

Improved Decision-Making: Integration’ with threat intelligence databases and the
ability to process large volumes of data enable ethical hackers to make better-informed
decisions. The contextual information provided by these tools helps prioritize
vulnerabilities and determine the most effective mitigation strategies.

Additional ChatGPT-Powered Hacking Tools

The rise of these sophisticated Al hacking tools has marked a significant shift in the
cybersecurity landscape, empowering ethical hackers to stay ahead of emerging threats and
challenges. Some of the most notable ChatGPT-powered hacking tools include HackerGPT,
BurpGPT, BugBountyGPT, PentestGPT, GPT White Hack, CybGPT, BugHunterGPT, Hacking APIs
GPT, h4ckGPT, HackerNewsGPT, Ethical Hacker GPT, and GP(en)T(ester). These tools
collectively enhance the capabilities of ethical hackers and cybersecurity professionals by
leveraging Al to automate tasks, provide real-time insights, and improve the overall
effectiveness of security operations.

1. HackerGPT

Source: www.chat.hackerai.co

HackerGPT is an Al-driven tool designed to assist ethical hackers in identifying
vulnerabilities. By leveraging advanced Al capabilities, HackerGPT provides real-time
assistance and automates complex tasks, thereby significantly reducing the time and
effort required for a thorough security assessment.

Module 01 Page 42 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

BurpGPT

Source: www.burpgpt.app

BurpGPT integrates the Burp Suite, a popular web vulnerability scanner, to enhance its
capabilities using Al. It utilizes Al-driven analysis to improve the accuracy of vulnerability
detection and reduce false positives. By automating report generation and enhancing
the scanning process, BurpGPT streamlines web application security testing and delivers
precise results.

BugBountyGPT

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-Rsk7ADgbD-bugbountygpt

BugBountyGPT is tailored for bug bounty hunters and provides tools and insights for
identifying and reporting security vulnerabilities. It automates the detection of
vulnerabilities and seamlessly integrates with bug bounty platforms, offering Al-driven
insights that enhance the efficiency and accuracy of bug bounty hunting.

PentestGPT

Source: www.github.com/GreyDGL/PentestGPT

PentestGPT was designed to assist penetration testers by automating various aspects of
the testing process. It leverages Al to conduct thorough vulnerability assessments and
generate detailed reports, thereby significantly reducing the required manual effort.

GPT White Hack

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-3ngv8eP6R-gpt-white-hack

GPT White Hack focuses on ethical hacking and provides tools to identify and mitigate
security threats. Utilizing Al-driven risk assessment and threat detection, this tool offers
real-time recommendations for mitigating the identified vulnerabilities.

CybGPT

Source: www.github.com/Coinnect-SA/CybGPT

CybGPT is a comprehensive Al tool for cybersecurity professionals that offers a wide
range of features for enhancing security operations. It integrates threat intelligence,
automates security assessments, and provides Al-driven incident-response capabilities.

BugHunterGPT

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-y2KnReOw4-bug-hunter-gpt

BugHunterGPT assists security researchers in identifying and reporting bugs and
vulnerabilities. It automates the detection process and integrates various reporting
platforms, providing Al-driven analyses and recommendations.

Module 01 Page 43 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

8. Hacking APIs GPT

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-UZxOCmgLH-hacking-apis-gpt

Hacking APIs GPT focuses on identifying vulnerabilities in APIs and providing tools to test
and secure them. It automates API vulnerability scanning, and uses Al-driven testing and
analysis to deliver comprehensive reports.

h4ckGPT

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-1ehIOOAPO-h4ckgpt

h4ckGPT is a versatile Al tool designed to assist ethical hackers in various aspects of
their work. It offers real-time assistance, automates vulnerability identification, and
provides recommendations and insights driven by Al.

10. HackerNewsGPT

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-BIfVX3cVxX-hackernews-gpt

HackerNewsGPT leverages Al to provide real-time news and updates relevant to
cybersecurity professionals. It aggregates news, performs Al-driven analyses of security
trends, and offers customizable alerts.

he Ethical Hacker GPT

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-j4PQ2hyqn-ethical-hacker-gpt

Ethical Hacker GPT provides tools and insights specifically designed for ethical hackers. It
offers Al-driven vulnerability assessments, real-time hacking assistance, and
comprehensive reporting.

12. GP(en)T(ester)

Source: www.chatgpt.com/g/g-zQfyABDUJ-gp-en-t-ester

GP(en)T(ester) is an Al-powered tool designed to assist ethical hackers in various aspects
of their work. It automates red teaming workflows, identifies vulnerabilities using Al,
and generates detailed reports.

Module 01 Page 44 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

24 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking REETTITHI | at

Objective

Explain Hacking Methodologies
and Frameworks

Hacking Methodologies and Frameworks

Learning the hacking methodologies and frameworks helps ethical hackers understand the
phases involved in hacking attempts along with-thetactics, techniques, and procedures used by
real hackers. This knowledge further helps thenv in strengthening the security infrastructure of
their organization. This section discusses various hacking methodologies and frameworks such
as the CEH ethical hacking framework,-cyber kill chain methodology, MITRE attack framework,
and Diamond Model of Intrusion Analysis.

Module 01 Page 45 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

25 Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council C\EH”

CEH Ethical Hacking Framework
Footprinting and Reconnaissance

Phase 1: Reconnaissance b
Scanning and Enumeration

|
Vulnerability Analysis

Phase 2: Vulnerability Scanning
| Ethical Hacking Tools

Ethical Hacking Domains «= [Nmap __][ Wireshark |[_ BurpSuite _|

Phase 3: Gaining Access | Metasploit || set ||_ Al
System Hacking Web App Hacking

Ethical Hacking TTPs

Phase 4: Maintaining Access Network Hacking Mobile Hacking Password Cracking Malware

Social Engineering | | Brute forcing |
Wireless Hacking OT/loT Hacking «

DoS/DDoS Privileges Escalations
Phase 5: Clearing Tracks

Cloud Hacking Hacking Al win injection| | sniffing || = |
|SessionHijacking | | Cryptanalysis |

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited . For more information, visit eccouncil.org

CEH Ethical Hacking Framework

EC-council’s CEH ethical hacking framework defines the’step-by-step process to perform ethical
hacking. The CEH ethical hacking framework follows the same process as that of an attacker,
and the only differences are in its hacking goals.and strategies. This methodology helps security
professionals and ethical hackers understand the various phases followed by real hackers in
order to achieve their objectives. An understanding of the CEH ethical hacking framework helps
ethical hackers learn various tactics, techniques, and tools used by attackers at various phases
of hacking, which further guide them to succeed in the ethical hacking process.

Footprinting and Reconnaissance

Phase 1: Reconnaissance 1
Scanning and Enumeration

Vulnerability Analysis
Phase 2: Vulnerability Scanning

| Ethical Hacking Tools
Ethical Hacking Domains | | Nmap || Wireshark |[ BurpSuite |

| Metasploit || set || Al
Phase 3: Gaining Access

System Hacking Web App Hacking
Ethical Hacking TTPs

Phase 4: Maintaining Access Network Hacking Mobile Hacking Password Cracking Malware

Social Engineering Brute forcing
Wireless Hacking OTiloT Hacking

DoS/DDoS Privileges Escalations
Phase 5: Clearing Tracks

Cloud Hacking Hacking Al SQL Injection Sniffing Al

Session Hijacking Cryptanalysis

Figure 1.3: EC-council’s CEH ethical hacking framework

Module 01 Page 46 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

According to the CEH ethical hacking framework, the following are the various phases involved
in hacking.

Phase 1: Reconnaissance

Footprinting and reconnaissance constitute the preparatory phase, in which an attacker
gathers as much information as possible about the target prior to launching an attack. In
this phase, the attacker creates a profile of the target organization and obtains
information such as its IP address range, namespace, and employees. Footprinting
facilitates system hacking by revealing vulnerabilities. For example, the organization’s
website may provide employee biographies or a personnel directory, which the hacker
can use for social engineering. Conducting a Whois query on the web can provide
information about the networks and domain names associated with a specific
organization. The footprinting target range may include the target organization’s clients,
employees, operations, network, and systems.

Note: Footprinting techniques are covered in Module O02: Footprinting and
Reconnaissance.

Reconnaissance techniques are broadly categorized into active and passive.

When an attacker is using passive reconnaissance techniques, they do not interact with
the target directly. Instead, the attacker relies On publicly available information, news
releases, or other no-contact methods.

Active reconnaissance techniques, on the’other hand, involve direct interactions with
the target system by using tools to detect open ports, accessible hosts, router locations,
network mapping, details of operating systems, and applications.

Scanning

Scanning is used to identify active hosts, open ports, and unnecessary services enabled
on particular hosts. In this phase, the attacker uses the details gathered during
reconnaissance to scan the network for specific information. Scanning is a logical
extension of active reconnaissance; in fact, some experts do not differentiate scanning
from active reconnaissance. However, there is a slight difference in that scanning
involves more in-depth probing by the attacker. Often, the reconnaissance and scanning
phases overlap, and it is not always possible to separate them.

Note: Scanning techniques are covered in Module 03: Scanning Networks.

Enumeration

Enumeration involves making active connections to a target system or subjecting it to
direct queries. It is a method of intrusive probing through which attackers gather
information such as network user lists, routing tables, security flaws, shared users,
groups, applications, and banners.

Note: Enumeration techniques are covered in Module 04: Enumeration.

Module 01 Page 47 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Phase 2: Vulnerability Scanning

Vulnerability assessment is the examination of the ability of a system or application,
including its current security procedures and controls, to withstand assault. It
recognizes, measures, and classifies security vulnerabilities in computer systems,
networks, and communication channels. Attackers perform vulnerability analysis to
identify security loopholes in the target organization’s network, communication
infrastructure, and end systems. The identified vulnerabilities are used by attackers to
perform further exploitation of the target network.

Note: Vulnerability assessment concepts are discussed in Module 05: Vulnerability
Analysis.

Phase 3: Gaining Access

This is the phase in which actual hacking occurs. The previous phases help attackers
identify security loopholes and vulnerabilities in the target organizational IT assets.
Attackers use this information, along with techniques such as password cracking and the
exploitation of vulnerabilities including buffer overflows, to gain access to the target
organizational system.

Gaining access refers to the point at which the attacker obtains access to the operating
system (OS) or applications on a computer or network. A hacker’s chances of gaining
access to a target system depend on several factors, such as the architecture and
configuration of the target system, the.perpetrator’s skill level, and the initial level of
access obtained. Once an attacker gains access to the target system, they attempt to
escalate privileges to obtain complete control. In this process, they also compromise the
intermediate systems connected.to it.

Escalating Privileges

After gaining access to a system using a low-privilege user account, the attacker may
attempt to increase their privileges to the administrator level to perform protected
system operations so that they can proceed to the next level of the system hacking
phase, which is the execution of applications. The attacker exploits known system
vulnerabilities to escalate user privileges.

Phase 4: Maintaining Access

Maintaining access refers to the phase in which an attacker attempts to retain
ownership of the system. Once an attacker gains access to the target system with
admin- or root-level privileges (thus owning the system), they can use both the system
and its resources at will. The attacker can either use the system as a launchpad to scan
and exploit other systems or maintain a low profile and continue exploitation. Both of
these actions can cause significant damage.

Attackers can upload, download, or manipulate data, applications, and configurations
on the owned system and also use malicious software to transfer usernames,
passwords, and any other information stored in the system. They can maintain control
over the system for a long time by closing vulnerabilities to prevent other hackers from

Module 01 Page 48 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

exploiting them. Occasionally, in the process, the attacker may provide some degree of
protection to the system from other attacks. Attackers use compromised systems to
launch further attacks.

= Clearing Tracks

To remain undetected, it is important for attackers to erase all the evidence of security
compromise from the system. To achieve this, they might modify or delete logs in the
system using certain log-wiping utilities, thus removing all evidence of their presence.

Note: The complete system hacking process (gaining access, maintaining access, and
clearing tracks) is covered in Module 06: System Hacking.

Module 01 Page 49 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

26 Mo01|I dntrouductlioent o  Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Cyber Kill Chain Methodology
* The cyber kill chain methodology is a component of intelligence-driven defense for the identification and prevention of malicious intrusion

activities

It provides greater insight into attack phases, which helps security professionals to understand the adversary’s tactics, techniques, and
procedures beforehand

Create a deliverable Exploit a vulnerability Create a command and control
malicious payload using by executing code on channel to communicate and

an exploit and a backdoor the victim’s system pass data back and forth
Weaponization Exploitation Command and Control

Reconnaissance Delivery Installation Actions on Objectives
Gather data on the target Send weaponized bundle to the Install malware on Perform actions to achieve
to probe for weak points victim using email, USB, etc. the target system intended objectives/goals

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Cyber Kill Chain Methodology

The cyber kill chain methodology is a component»of intelligence-driven defense for the
identification and prevention of malicious intrusion activities. This methodology helps security
professionals in identifying the steps that adversaries follow in order to accomplish their goals.

The cyber kill chain is a framework developed for securing cyberspace based on the concept of
military kill chains. This method aims to,actively enhance intrusion detection and response. The
cyber kill chain is equipped with a seven-phase protection mechanism to mitigate and reduce
cyber threats.

According to Lockheed Martin, cyberattacks might occur in seven different phases, from
reconnaissance to the final accomplishment of the objective. An understanding of cyber kill
chain methodology helps security professionals to leverage security controls at different stages
of an attack and helps them to prevent the attack before it succeeds. It also provides greater
insight into the attack phases, which helps in understanding the adversary’s TTPs beforehand.

Module 01 Page 50 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Discussed below are various phases included in cyber kill chain methodology:

Create a deliverable Exploit a vulnerability Create a command and control
malicious payload using by executing code on channel to communicate and

an exploit and a backdoor the victim’s system pass data back and forth
Weaponization Exploitation Command and Control

i; 1~ my

~~ Ti
Na Te4  A—_——  e—_—e

Reconnaissance Delivery Installation Actions on Objectives
Gather data on the target Send weaponized bundle to the Install malware on Perform actions to achieve
to probe for weak points victim using email, USB, etc. the target system intended objectives/goals

Figure 1.4: Cyber kill chain methodology

=» Reconnaissance

An adversary performs reconnaissance to collect as much information about the target
as possible to probe for weak points before actually attacking. They look for information
such as publicly available information on the Internet, network information, system
information, and the organizational information of the target. By conducting
reconnaissance across different network levels,the adversary can gain information such
as network blocks, specific IP addresses, and» employee details. The adversary may use
automated tools to obtain information Such as open ports and services, vulnerabilities in
applications, and login credentials.“Such information can help the adversary in gaining
backdoor access to the target network.

Activities of the adversary include the following:

o Gathering information about the target organization by searching the Internet or
through social engineering

o Performing analysis of various online activities and publicly available information

o Gathering information from social networking sites and web services

o Obtaining information about websites visited

o Monitoring and analyzing the target organization’s website

o Performing Whois, DNS, and network footprinting

o Performing scanning to identify open ports and services

= Weaponization

The adversary analyzes the data collected in the previous stage to identify the
vulnerabilities and techniques that can exploit and gain unauthorized access to the
target organization. Based on the vulnerabilities identified during analysis, the adversary
selects or creates a tailored deliverable malicious payload (remote-access malware
weapon) using an exploit and a backdoor to send it to the victim. An adversary may

Module 01 Page 51 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

target specific network devices, operating systems, endpoint devices, or even
individuals within the organization to carry out their attack. For example, the adversary
may send a phishing email to an employee of the target organization, which may include
a malicious attachment such as a virus or worm that, when downloaded, installs a
backdoor on the system that allows remote access to the adversary.

The following are the activities of the adversary:

o Identifying appropriate malware payload based on the analysis

o Creating anew malware payload or selecting, reusing, modifying the available
malware payloads based on the identified vulnerability

o Creating a phishing email campaign

o Leveraging exploit kits and botnets

Delivery

The previous stage included creating a weapon. Its payload is transmitted to the
intended victim(s) as an email attachment, via a malicious link on websites, or through a
vulnerable web application or USB drive. Delivery is a key stage that measures the
effectiveness of the defense strategies implemented by the target organization based
on whether the intrusion attempt of the adversary is blocked or not.

The following are the activities of the adversary:

o Sending phishing emails to employeesof the target organization

o Distributing USB drives containingymalicious payload to employees of the target
organization

o Performing attacks such as watering hole on the compromised website

o Implementing various hacking tools against the operating systems, applications, and
servers of the target organization

Exploitation

After the weapon is transmitted to the intended victim, exploitation triggers the
adversary’s malicious code to exploit a vulnerability in the operating system,
application, or server on a target system. At this stage, the organization may face
threats such as authentication and authorization attacks, arbitrary code execution,
physical security threats, and security misconfiguration.

Activities of the adversary include the following:

o Exploiting software or hardware vulnerabilities to gain remote access to the target
system

Installation

The adversary downloads and installs more malicious software on the target system to
maintain access to the target network for an extended period. They may use the

Module 01 Page 52 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

weapon to install a backdoor to gain remote access. After the injection of the malicious
code on one target system, the adversary gains the capability to spread the infection to
other end systems in the network. Also, the adversary tries to hide the presence of
malicious activities from security controls like firewalls using various techniques such as
encryption.

The following are the activities of the adversary:

o Downloading and installing malicious software such as backdoors

o Gaining remote access to the target system

o Leveraging various methods to keep backdoor hidden and running

o Maintaining access to the target system

Command and Control

The adversary creates a command and control channel, which establishes two-way
communication between the victim’s system and adversary-controlled server to
communicate and pass data back and forth. The adversaries implement techniques such
as encryption to hide the presence of such channels. Using this channel, the adversary
performs remote exploitation on the target system or network.

The following are the activities of the adversary:

o Establishing a two-way communication.channel between the victim’s system and the
adversary-controlled server

o Leveraging channels such as web traffic, email communication, and DNS messages.

o Applying privilege escalation techniques

o Hiding any evidence of compromise using techniques such as encryption

Actions on Objectives

The adversary controls the victim’s system from a remote location and finally
accomplishes their intended goals. The adversary gains access to confidential data,
disrupts the services or network, or destroys the operational capability of the target by
gaining access to its network and compromising more systems. Also, the adversary may
use this as a launching point to perform other attacks.

Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs)

Organizations should understand TTPs to protect their network against threat actors and
upcoming attacks. TTPs enable the organizations to stop attacks at the initial stage, thereby
protecting the network against massive damages.

Tactics

Tactics describe the way the threat actor operates during different phases of an attack.
It consists of the various tactics used to gather information for the initial exploitation,
perform privilege escalation and lateral movement, and deploy measures for

Module 01 Page 53 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

persistence access to the system. Generally, APT groups depend on a certain set of
unchanging tactics, but in some cases, they adapt to different circumstances and alter
the way they perform their attacks. Therefore, the difficulty of detecting and attributing
the attack campaign depends on the tactics used to perform the attack.

An organization can profile threat actors based on tactics they use; this consists of the
way they gather information about a target, the methods they follow for initial
compromise, and the number of entry points they use while attempting to enter the
target network.

For example, to obtain information, some threat actors depend solely on information
available on the Internet, whereas others might perform social engineering or use
connections in intermediate organizations. Once information such as the email
addresses of employees of the target organization is gathered, the threat actors either
choose to approach the target one by one or as a group. Furthermore, the attackers’
designed payload can stay constant from the beginning to the end of the attack or may
be changed based on the targeted individual. Therefore, to understand the threat actors
better, tactics used in the early stages of an attack must be analyzed properly.

Another method of analyzing the APT groups is inspecting the infrastructure and tools
used to perform their attack. For example, consider establishing a command and control
channel on the servers controlled by the attacker. These C&C servers may be located
within a specific geographical location or may spread across the Internet and can be
Static or can change dynamically. It is\also important to analyze the tools used to
perform the attack. This includes analyzing the exploits and tools used by various APT
groups. In such a scenario, a sophisticated threat actor may exploit many zero-day
vulnerabilities by using adapted tools and obfuscation methods. However, this might be
difficult as less-sophisticated threat actors generally depend on publicly known
vulnerabilities and open-source tools. Identifying this type of tactic helps in profiling the
APT groups and building defensive measures in advance.

In some cases, understanding the tactics used in the last stages of an attack helps in
profiling the threat actor. Also, the methods used to cover the tracks help the target
organization understand attack campaigns. Analyzing the tactics used by the attackers
helps in creating an initial profile by understanding different phases of an APT life cycle.
This profile helps in performing further analysis of the techniques and procedures used
by the attackers. An attacker may continually change the TTPs used, so it is important to
constantly review and update the tactics used by the APT groups.

Techniques

To launch an attack successfully, threat actors use several techniques during its
execution. These techniques include initial exploitation, setting up and maintaining
command and control channels, accessing the target infrastructure, and covering the
tracks of data exfiltration. The techniques followed by the threat actor to conduct an
attack might vary, but they are mostly similar and can be used for profiling. Therefore,

Module 01 Page 54 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

understanding the techniques used in the different phases of an attack is essential to
analyzing the threat groups effectively.

Techniques can also be analyzed at each stage of the threat life cycle. Therefore, the
techniques at the initial stage mainly describe the tools used for information gathering
and initial exploitation. The techniques used in this stage need not necessarily have a
technical aspect. For example, in social engineering, certain non-technical software tools
are used as an effective way of gathering information. An attacker can use such tools to
obtain the email addresses of target organization employees through publicly available
resources.

In the same manner, purely human-based social engineering can be used to perform the
initial exploitation. For example, consider a scenario where the victim is tricked via a
phone call to reveal their login credentials for accessing the target organization’s
internal network. These techniques are used in the initial phase of an attack to gather
information about the target and break the first line of defense.

Techniques used in the middle stages of an attack mostly depend on technical tools for
initially escalating privileges on systems that are compromised or performing lateral
movements within the target organization’s network. At this stage of an attack, the
attackers use various exploits or misuse configuration vulnerabilities on the target
system. They may also exploit network design flaws to gain access to other systems in
the network. In all of these cases, either exploits or a collection of tools allows the
attacker to perform a successful attackain this scenario, the term “technique” is the set
of tools and the way they are usedto obtain intermediate results during an attack
Campaign.

The techniques in the last stage of an attack can have both technical and nontechnical
aspects. In such a scenario, the techniques used for data-stealing are usually based on
network technology and encryption. For example, the threat actor encrypts the stolen
files, transfers them through the established command and control channel, and copies
them to their own system. After successfully executing the attack and transferring the
files, the attacker follows certain purely technical techniques to cover their tracks. They
use automated software tools to clear logs files to evade detection.

After aggregating the techniques used in all the stages of an attack, the organization can
use the information to profile the threat actors. In order to make an accurate attribution
of threat actors, the organization must observe all the techniques used by its
adversaries.

Procedures

“Procedures” involve a sequence of actions performed by the threat actors to execute
different steps of an attack life cycle. The number of actions usually differs depending
upon the objectives of the procedure and the APT group. An advanced threat actor uses
advanced procedures that consist of more actions than a normal procedure to achieve
the same intermediate result. This is done mainly to increase the success rate of an
attack and decrease the probability of detection by security mechanisms.

Module 01 Page 55 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

For example, in a basic procedure of information gathering, an actor collects
information about the target organization; identifies key targets, employees; collects
their contact details, identifies vulnerable systems and potential entry points to the
target network, and documents all the collected information. The further actions of an
adversary depend on the tactics used. These actions include extensive research and
repeated information gathering to collect in-depth and up-to-date information on the
target individuals via social networking sites. This information can assist threat actors in
performing spear phishing, monitoring security controls to identify zero-day exploits in
the target systems, and other tasks. For example, a threat actor using a more detailed
procedure executes the malware payload. At the time of execution, the malicious code
decrypts itself, evades security monitoring controls, deploys persistence, and establishes
a command and control channel for communicating with the victim system. This type of
procedure is common for malware, where different threat actors may implement the
same feature, and hence it is useful in forensic investigations.

An understanding and proper analysis of the procedures followed by certain threat
actors during an attack helps organizations profile threat actors. In the initial stage of an
attack, such as during information gathering, observing the procedure of an APT group is
difficult. However, the later stages of an attack can leave trails that may be used to
understand the procedures the attacker followed:

Adversary Behavioral Identification

Adversary behavioral identification involves theidentification of the common methods or
techniques followed by an adversary to launch, attacks to penetrate an organization’s network.
It gives security professionals insight into.upcoming threats and exploits. It helps them plan
network security infrastructure and adapt a range of security procedures as prevention against
various cyberattacks.

Given below are some of the behaviors of an adversary that can be used to enhance the
detection capabilities of security devices:

Internal Reconnaissance

Once the adversary is inside the target network, they follow various techniques and
methods to carry out internal reconnaissance. This includes the enumeration of
systems, hosts, processes, the execution of various commands to find out information
such as the local user context and system configuration, hostname, IP addresses, active
remote systems, and programs running on the target systems. Security professionals
can monitor the activities of an adversary by checking for unusual commands executed
in the Batch scripts and PowerShell and by using packet capturing tools.

Use of PowerShell

PowerShell can be used by an adversary as a tool for automating data exfiltration and
launching further attacks. To identify the misuse of PowerShell in the network, security
professionals can check PowerShell’s transcript logs or Windows Event logs. The user

Module 01 Page 56 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

agent string and IP addresses can also be used to identify malicious hosts who try to
exfiltrate data.

Unspecified Proxy Activities

An adversary can create and configure multiple domains pointing to the same host,
thus, allowing an adversary to switch quickly between the domains to avoid detection.
Security professionals can find unspecified domains by checking the data feeds that are
generated by those domains. Using this data feed, the security professionals can also
find any malicious files downloaded and the unsolicited communication with the outside
network based on the domains.

Use of Command-Line Interface

On gaining access to the target system, an adversary can make use of the command-line
interface to interact with the target system, browse the files, read file content, modify
file content, create new accounts, connect to the remote system, and download and
install malicious code. Security professionals can identify this behavior of an adversary
by checking the logs for process ID, processes having arbitrary letters and numbers, and
malicious files downloaded from the Internet.

HTTP User Agent

In HTTP-based communication, the server identifies the connected HTTP client using the
user agent field. An adversary modifies,~the» content of the HTTP user agent field to
communicate with the compromised system and to carry further attacks. Therefore,
security professionals can identify this:attack at an initial stage by checking the content
of the user agent field.

Command and Control Server

Adversaries use command and control servers to communicate remotely with
compromised systems through an encrypted session. Using this encrypted channel, the
adversary can steal data, delete data, and launch further attacks. Security professionals
can detect compromised hosts or networks by identifying the presence of a command
and control server by tracking network traffic for outbound connection attempts,
unwanted open ports, and other anomalies.

Use of DNS Tunneling

Adversaries use DNS tunneling to obfuscate malicious traffic in the legitimate traffic
carried by common protocols used in the network. Using DNS tunneling, an adversary
can also communicate with the command and control server, bypass security controls,
and perform data exfiltration. Security professionals can identify DNS tunneling by
analyzing malicious DNS requests, DNS payload, unspecified domains, and the
destination of DNS requests.

Use of Web Shell

An adversary uses a web shell to manipulate the web server by creating a shell within a
website; it allows an adversary to gain remote access to the functionalities of a server.

Module 01 Page 57 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EG-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Using a web shell, an adversary performs various tasks such as data exfiltration, file
transfers, and file uploads. Security professionals can identify the web shell running in
the network by analyzing server access, error logs, suspicious strings that indicate
encoding, user agent strings, and through other methods.

= Data Staging

After successful penetration into a target’s network, the adversary uses data staging
techniques to collect and combine as much data as possible. The types of data collected
by an adversary include sensitive data about the employees and customers, the
business tactics of an organization, financial information, and network infrastructure
information. Once collected, the adversary can either exfiltrate or destroy the data.
Security professionals can detect data staging by monitoring network traffic for
malicious file transfers, file integrity monitoring, and event logs.

Indicators of Compromise (loCs)

Cyber threats are continuously evolving with the newer TTPs adapted based on the
vulnerabilities of the target organization. Security professionals must perform continuous
monitoring of loCs to effectively and efficiently detect and respond to evolving cyber threats.
Indicators of Compromise are the clues, artifacts, and pieces of forensic data that are found on
a network or operating system of an organization that indicate a potential intrusion or
malicious activity in the organization’s infrastructure.

However, loCs are not intelligence; rather, loCsysact as a good source of information about
threats that serve as data points in the intelligence process. Actionable threat intelligence
extracted from loCs helps organizations enhance incident-handling strategies. Cybersecurity
professionals use various automated -tools to monitor loCs to detect and prevent various
security breaches to the organization. Monitoring loCs also helps security teams enhance the
security controls and policies of the organization to detect and block suspicious traffic to thwart
further attacks. To overcome the threats associated with loCs, some organizations like STIX and
TAXII have developed standardized reports that contain condensed data related to attacks and
Shared it with others to leverage the incident response.

An loC is an atomic indicator, computed indicator, or behavioral indicator. It is the information
regarding suspicious or malicious activities that is collected from various security
establishments in a network’s infrastructure. Atomic indicators are those that cannot be
segmented into smaller parts, and whose meaning is not changed in the context of an intrusion.
Examples of atomic indicators are IP addresses and email addresses. Computed indicators are
obtained from the data extracted from a security incident. Examples of computed indicators are
hash values and regular expressions. Behavioral indicators refer to a grouping of both atomic
and computed indicators, combined on the basis of some logic.

Categories of Indicators of Compromise

The cybersecurity professionals must have proper knowledge about various possible threat
actors and their tactics related to cyber threats, mostly called Indicators of Compromise (loCs).

Module 01 Page 58 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

This understanding of loCs helps security professionals quickly detect the threats entering the
organization and protect the organization from evolving threats.

For this purpose, loCs are divided into four categories:

Email Indicators

Attackers usually prefer email services to send malicious data to the target organization
or individual. Such socially engineered emails are preferred due to their ease of use and
comparative anonymity. Examples of email indicators include the sender’s email
address, email subject, and attachments or links.

Network Indicators

Network indicators are useful for command and control, malware delivery, and
identifying details about the operating system, browser type, and other computer-
specific information. Examples of network indicators include URLs, domain names, and
IP addresses.

Host-Based Indicators

Host-based indicators are found by performing an analysis of the infected system within
the organizational network. Examples of host-based indicators include filenames, file
hashes, registry keys, DLLs, and mutex.

Behavioral Indicators

Generally, typical loCs are useful for Jidentifying indications of intrusion, such as
malicious IP addresses, virus signatures, MDS hash, and domain names. Behavioral loCs
are used to identify specific behavior related to malicious activities such as code
injection into the memory or running the scripts of an application. Well-defined
behaviors enable broad protection to block all current and future malicious activities.
These indicators are useful to identify when legitimate system services are used for
abnormal or unexpected activities. Examples of behavioral indicators include document
executing PowerShell script, and remote command execution.

Listed below are some of the key Indicators of Compromise (loCs):

Unusual outbound network traffic

Unusual activity through a privileged user account

Geographical anomalies

Multiple login failures

Increased database read volume

Large HTML response size

Multiple requests for the same file

Mismatched port-application traffic

Suspicious registry or system file changes

Module 01 Page 59 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= Unusual DNS requests

= Unexpected patching of systems

# Signs of Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) activity

= Bundles of data in the wrong places

= Web traffic with superhuman behavior

Module 01 Page 60 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

27 Mo014|I dntrouductilone to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

MITRE ATT&CK Fram ework

1 MITRE ATT&CK is a globally accessible knowledge base of adversary tactics and techniques based on real-world observations

2 The ATT&CK knowledge base is used as a foundation for the development of specific threat models and methodologies in the private sector,
government, and the cybersecurity product and service community

3 The 14 tactic categories within ATT&CK for Enterprise are derived from the later stages (exploit, control, maintain, and execute) of the
seven stages of the Cyber Kill Chain

Recon Weaponize Deliver Exploit

\ } \
y q

PRE-ATT&CK Enterprise ATT&CK

https://attack.mitre.org
Copyright © EC- CouncAill.l  Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

MITRE ATT&CK Framework

Source: https://attack.mitre.org

MITRE ATT&CK is a globally accessible knowledge base of adversary tactics and techniques
based on real-world observations. The ATT&CK knowledge base is used as a foundation for the
development of specific threat models and. methodologies in the private sector, in government,
and in the cybersecurity product and service community.

MITRE ATT&CK comprises three collections of tactics and techniques, called Enterprise, Mobile,
and PRE-ATT&CK matrices, as each collection is represented in a matrix form. ATT&CK for
Enterprise contains 14 categories of tactics, which are derived from the later stages (exploit,
control, maintain, and execute) of the seven-stage Cyber Kill Chain. This provides a deeper level
of granularity in describing what can occur during an intrusion.

Recon Weaponize Deliver Exploit Control

\ ) \
y |

PRE-ATT&CK Enterprise ATT&CK

Figure 1.5: MITRE Attack Framework

The following are the tactics in ATT&CK for Enterprise

#" Reconnaissance =» Execution

= Resource Development =" Persistence

= Initial Access = Privilege Escalation

Module 01 Page 61 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E@-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Defense Evasion *" Collection

Credential Access = Command and Control

Discovery s § Exfiltration

Lateral Movement =» Impact

Some MITRE ATT&CK for Enterprise Use Cases:

Prioritize development and acquisition efforts for computer network defense
Capabilities.

Conduct analyses of alternatives between network defense capabilities.

Determine “coverage” of a set of network defense capabilities.

Describe an intrusion chain of events based on the technique used from start to finish
with a common reference.

Identify commonalities between adversary tradecraft, as well as distinguishing
characteristics.

Connect mitigations, weaknesses, and adversaries.

Module 01 Page 62 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

28 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Diam ond Model of Intrusion Analysis
* The Diamond Model offers a framework for identifying the clusters of events that are correlated on any of the systems in an organization

* It can control the vital atomic element occurring in any intrusion activity, which is referred to as the Diamond event

* Using this model, efficient mitigation approaches can be developed, and analytic efficiency can be increased

Meta Features of Diamond Model
Adversary | An opponent “who” was behind the attack

Pd

Victim The target that has been exploited or “where” y
the attack was performed

Deployed via

Capabilit The attack strategies or “how” the attack was
P y performed

“what” the adversary used to reach the
Infrastructure action

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Diamond Model of Intrusion Analysis

The Diamond Model, developed by expert analysts, introduces state-of-the-art technology for
intrusion analysis. This model offers a framework and a set of procedures for recognizing
clusters of events that are correlated on any.of the systems in an organization. The model
determines the vital atomic element that occurs in any intrusion activity and is referred to as
the Diamond event. Analysts can identify,the events and connect them as activity threads for
obtaining information regarding how and what transpired during an attack. Analysts can also
easily identify whether any data are required by examining the missing features. It also offers a
method or route map for analyzing incidents related to any malicious activity and predict the
possibility of an attack and its origin.

With the Diamond Model, more advanced and efficient mitigation approaches can be
developed, and analytic efficiency can be increased. This also results in cost savings for the
defender and rising cost for the adversary. The Diamond event consists of four basic features:
adversary, capability, infrastructure, and victim. This model is named so because when all the
features are arranged according to the relationship between them, it forms as a diamond-
shaped structure. Although it appears to be a simple approach, it is rather complex and
requires high expertise and skill to traceroute the flow of attack.

Module 01 Page 63 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Deployed via

Figure 1.6: Meta features of the Diamond Model

The following are the essential features of the Diamond event in the Diamond Model of
Intrusion Analysis.

Adversary: An adversary often refers to an opponent or hacker responsible for the
attack event. An adversary takes advantage of a capability against the victim to perform
a malicious activity for financial benefit or to damage the reputation of the victim. An
adversary can be individuals such as insiders or a competitor organization. Adversaries
can use many techniques to gain information such as email addresses and network
assets and attempt to attack any applications used in smartphones to gain sensitive
information.

Victim: The victim is the target that has been exploited or the environment where the
attack was performed. The adversary exploits the vulnerabilities or security loopholes in
the victim’s infrastructure byXusing their resources. The victim can be any person,
organization, institution, or even network information such as IP addresses, domain
names, email addresses, and sensitive personal information of an individual.

Capability: Capability refers to all the strategies, methods, and procedures associated
with an attack. It can also be a malware or tool used by an adversary against the target.
Capability includes simple and complex attack techniques such as brute forcing and
ransomware attacks.

Infrastructure: Infrastructure refers to the hardware or software used in the network by
the target that has a connection with the adversary. It refers to “what” the adversary
has used to reach the victim. Consider an organization having an email server in which
all the data regarding employee email IDs and other personal details are stored. The
adversary can use the server as infrastructure to perform any type of attack by targeting
a single employee. Exploiting infrastructure leads to data leakage and data exfiltration.

Additional Event Meta-Features

In the Diamond Model, an event contains some of the basic meta-features that provide
additional information such as the time and source of the event. These meta-features help in
linking related events, making it easier and faster for analysts to trace an attack.

Module 01 Page 64 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

The following are the features that help in connecting related events.

Timestamp: This feature can reveal the time and date of an event. It is important as it
can indicate the beginning and end of the event. It also helps in analysis and
determining the periodicity of the event.

Phase: The phase helps in determining the progress of an attack or any malicious
activity. The different phases of an attack include the phases used in the cyber kill chain
framework: reconnaissance, weaponization, delivery, exploitation etc.

Result: The result is the outcome of any event. For example, the result of an attack can
be success, failure, or unknown. It can also be segregated using security fundamentals
such as confidentiality(C) compromised, integrity(l) compromised, and availability(A)
compromised. CIA Compromised.

Direction: This feature refers to the direction of the attack. For instance, the direction
can indicate how the adversary was routed to the victim. This feature can be immensely
helpful when describing network-based and host-based events. The possible values for
this feature include victim to infrastructure, adversary to infrastructure, infrastructure
to infrastructure, and bidirectional.

Methodology: The methodology refers to any technique that is used by the adversary to
perform an attack. This feature allows the analyst to define the overall class of action
performed. Some attack techniques are spear-phishing emails, distributed denial-of-
service (DDoS) attacks, content delivery-attacks, and drive-by-compromise.

Resource: Resource feature entails the_use of external resources like tools or technology
used to perform the attack. It includes hardware, software, access, knowledge, data etc.

Extended Diamond Model

The extended Diamond Model also includes necessary features such as socio-political meta-
features to determine the relationship between the adversary and victim as well as technology
meta-features for infrastructure and capabilities.

Adversary

Social-Political

Infrastructure fe Capability

Technology

Victim

Figure 1.7: Extended Diamond Model of Intrusion Analysis

Module 01 Page 65 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= Socio-political meta-feature: The socio-political meta-feature describes the relationship
between the adversary and victim. This feature is used to determine the goal or
motivation of the attacker; common motivations include financial benefit, corporate
espionage, and hacktivism.

= Technology meta-feature: The technology meta-feature describes the relationship
between the infrastructure and capability. This meta-feature describes how technology
can enable both infrastructure and capability for communication and operation. It can
also be used to analyze the technology used in an organization to identify any malicious
activity.

Module 01 Page 66 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

29 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council at

Objective

summarize the Techniques
used in Information Security

Controls

Information Security Controls

Information security controls prevent the occurrence of unwanted events and reduce risk to
the organization’s information assets. The basic¢.security concepts critical to information on the
Internet are confidentiality, integrity, and availability; the concepts related to the persons
accessing the information are authentication, authorization, and non-repudiation. Information
is the greatest asset of an organization»’It must be secured using various policies, creating
awareness, employing security mechanisms, or by other means.

This section deals with Information Assurance (IA), continual/adaptive security strategy,
defense-in-depth, risk management, cyber threat intelligence, threat modeling, incident
management, and Al and ML concepts.

Module 01 Page 67 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

30 Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council C\EH”

Information Assurance (IA)
* lArefers to the assurance that the integrity, availability, confidentiality, and authenticity of information and information systems is protected

during the usage, processing, storage, and transmission of information

* Some of the processes that help in achieving information assurance include:

(1) Developing local policy, process, and guidance (5) Creating plans for identified resource requirements

(2) Designing network and user authentication strategies Applying appropriate information assurance
controls

(3) Identifying network vulnerabilities and threats (7) Performing certification and accreditation

(4) Identifying problem and resource requirements Providing information assurance training

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Information Assurance (IA)

IA refers to the assurance of the integrity, availability, confidentiality, and authenticity of
information and information systems during the Usage, processing, storage, and transmission of
information. Security experts accomplish information assurance with the help of physical,
technical, and administrative controls;\ information Assurance and _ Information § Risk
Management (IRM) ensure that only authorized personnel access and use information. This
helps in achieving information security‘and business continuity.

Some of the processes that help in achieving information assurance include:

= Developing local policy, process, and guidance in such a way to maintain the information
systems at an optimum security level

= Designing network and user authentication strategy—Designing a secure network
ensures the privacy of user records and other information on the network.
Implementing an effective user authentication strategy secures the information
system’s data

# Identifying network vulnerabilities and threats—Vulnerability assessments outline the
Security posture of the network. Performing vulnerability assessments in search of
network vulnerabilities and threats help to take the proper measures to overcome them

» Identifying problems and resource requirements

=" Creating a plan for identified resource requirements

= Applying appropriate information assurance controls

= Performing the Certification and Accreditation (C&A) process of information systems
helps to trace vulnerabilities, and implement safety measures to nullify them

Module 01 Page 68 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

=" Providing information assurance training to all personnel in federal and private
organizations brings among them an awareness of information technology

Module 01 Page 69 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

31 Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council ¢|EH”

Continual/ Adaptive Security Strategy
* Organizations should adopt adaptive security strategy, which involves implementing all the four network security approaches

* The adaptive security strategy consists of four security activities corresponding to each security approach

Predict Protect
* Risk and Vulnerability Assessment « Defense-in-depth Security Strategy

« Attack Surface Analysis Protect endpoints

« Threat Intelligence Protect network
Protect data

Respond
Detect

« Incident Response
* Continuous Threat

Monitoring

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Continual/Adaptive Security Strategy

The adaptive security strategy prescribes that continuous prediction, prevention, detection, and
response actions must be taken to ensure comprehensive computer network defense.

Protection: This includes a set of prior,countermeasures taken towards eliminating all
the possible vulnerabilities on the»network. It includes security measures such as
security policies, physical security, host security, firewall, and IDS.

Detection: Detection involves assessing the network for abnormalities such as attacks,
damages, unauthorized access attempts, and modifications, and identifying their
locations in the network. It includes the regular monitoring of network traffic using
network monitoring and packet sniffing tools.

Responding: Responding to incidents involves actions such as identifying incidents,
finding their root causes, and planning a possible course of actions for addressing them.
It includes incident response, investigation, containment, impact mitigation, and
eradication steps for addressing the incidents. It also includes deciding whether the
incident is an actual security incident or a false positive.

Prediction: Prediction involves the identification of potential attacks, targets, and
methods prior to materialization to a viable attack. Prediction includes actions such as
conducting risk and vulnerability assessment, performing attack surface analysis,
consuming threat intelligence data to predict future threats on the organization.

Module 01 Page 70 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Predict Protect
# Risk and Vulnerability Assessment * Defense-in-depth Security Strategy

# Attack Surface Analysis * Protect endpoints
by

« Threat Intelligence * Protect network
RY * Protect data

@
ey Assets

Respond Detect
* Incident Response Physical * Continuous Threat

Monitoring

dg
Figure 1.8: Continual/Adaptive Security Strategy

Module 01 Page 71 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= vi3

32 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking -LOUNCI

Defense- in- Depth

* Defense-in-depth is a security strategy in which several
protection layers are placed throughout an information
system

- It helps to prevent direct attacks against the system and
its data because a break in one layer only leads the
attacker to the next layer

Defense-in-Depth Layers
Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Defense-in-Depth

Defense-in-depth is a security strategy in which security professionals use several protection
layers throughout an information system. This strategy uses the military principle that it is more
difficult for an enemy to defeat a complex and\multi-layered defense system than to penetrate
a single barrier. Defense-in-depth helps to prevent direct attacks against an information system
and its data because a break in one layer,only leads the attacker to the next layer. If a hacker
gains access to a system, defensesin-depth minimizes any adverse impact and gives
administrators and engineers time to deploy new or updated countermeasures to prevent a
recurrence of the intrusion.

Defense-in-Depth Layers

Figure 1.9: Defense in Depth

Module 01 Page 72 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Defense-in-Depth Layers

Defense-in-Depth Layers



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

33. Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

z fa

What is Risk?
* Risk refers to the degree of uncertainty or expectation that an adverse event may cause damage to the system
* Risks are categorized into different levels according to their estimated impact on the system
* Arisk matrix is used to scale risk by considering the probability, likelihood, and consequence or impact of the risk

Risk Levels Risk Matrix
Risk Level Action Probability Consequences

Barada atone died eres Insignificant Minor Moderate Major Severe

Extreme or combat risk - Very High ,
His gh * Identify and impose controls to reduce risk to a eos - Probabi=li ty Low M — Higg h E an Exxttreme

reasonably low level ick
e ig 

61 - 80% o : 
 Probability ’

 Low Medium High High Extreme

* No urgent action is req °
uired ° Equal . . . .

Medi. um = Implement controls as soon as possible to 1 - ee60e9  S| Probabiulei ty eae Machin in H igh High

reduce risk to a reasonably low level &

21-40%a = Low : :
 od Probability Low Low Medium Medium High

= Take prev
L entive steps to mitigate the effects of 

Ow risk 1- - Very Low ; i .
20%209  Probability Low Low Medium Medium High

Note: This is an example of a risk matrix. Organizations need to create their own risk matrix
based on their business needs

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

e ©

What is Risk?

Risk refers to the degree of uncertainty or expectation of potential damage that an adverse
event may cause to the system or its resources;under specified conditions. Alternatively, risk
can also be:

The probability of the occurrence of.a’threat or an event that will damage, cause loss to,
or have other negative impacts.on the organization, either from internal or external
liabilities.

The possibility of a threat acting upon an internal or external vulnerability and causing
harm to a resource.

The product of the likelihood that an event will occur and the impact that the event
might have on an information technology asset.

The relation between Risk, Threats, Vulnerabilities, and Impact is as follows:

RISK = Threats x Vulnerabilities x Impact

The impact of an event on an information asset is the product of vulnerability in the asset and
the asset’s value to its stakeholders. IT risk can be expanded to

RISK = Threat x Vulnerability x Asset Value

In fact, the risk is the combinationo f the following two factors:

The probability of the occurrence of an adverse event

The consequence of the adverse event

Module 01 Page 73 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EC-Gouncil
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Risk Level

Risk level is an assessment of the resulted impact on the network. Various methods exist to
differentiate the risk levels depending on the risk frequency and severity. One of the common
methods used to classify risks is to develop a two-dimensional matrix.

Working out the frequency or probability of an incident happening (likelihood) and its possible
consequences is necessary to analyze risks. This is referred to as the level of risk. Risk can be
represented and calculated using the following formula:

Level of Risk = Consequence x Likelihood

Risks are categorized into different levels according to their estimated impact on the system.
Primarily, there are four risk levels, which include extreme, high, medium, and low levels.
Remember that control measures may decrease the level of a risk, but do not always entirely
eliminate the risk.

Risk Level | Consequence Action

> Immediate measures are required to combat the risk
Extreme or|  Serious or 
Hi > Identify and impose controls to reduce the ri:sk to a

igh Imminent danger
reasonably low level

> Immediate action.is not required, but action should be
implement quickly

Medium Moderate danger
> \Implementcontrols as soon as possible to reduce the risk to

a reasonably low level

Low Negligible danger | > Take@préventive steps to mitigate the effects of risk

Table 1.4: Risk Levels

Risk Matrix

The risk matrix scales the risk occurrence or likelihood probability, along with its consequences
or impact. It is the graphical representation of risk severity and the extent to which the controls
can or will mitigate it. The Risk matrix is one of the simplest processes to use for increased
visibility of risk; it contributes to the management’s decision-making capability. The risk matrix
defines various levels of risk and categorizes them as the product of negative probability and
negative severity. Although there are many standard risk matrices, individual organizations
must create their own.

Module 01 Page 74 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Probability Consequences

Insignificant Minor Moderate Major Severe

81 - 100% ary High Low Medium High Extreme Extreme
Probability

61 - 80% a Low Medium High High Extreme
5 Probability

_— 6| Equa l .; . . .
41-60% £ Probability Low Medium Medium High High

®

21-40% |Sa] _Pr oLboawbi lity Low Low Medium | Medium Higgh
1-20% Nery Lew Low Low Medium | Medium High

Probability

Table 1.5: Risk Matrix

The above table is the graphical representation of a risk matrix, which is used to visualize and
compare risks. It differentiates the two levels of risk and is a simple way of analyzing them.

# Likelihood: The chance of the risk occurring

= Consequence: The severity of a risk event that occurs

Note: This is an example of a risk matrix. Organizations must create individual risk matrices
based on their business needs.

Module 01 Page 75 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

34 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Risk Management
* Risk management is the process of reducing and maintaining risk at an acceptable level by means of a well-defined and actively

employed security program

Risk Management Phases

Identifies the sources, causes, consequences, and other details of the internal and external risks
Risk Identification affecting the security of the organization

Assesses the organization’s risk and provides an estimate of the likelihood and impact of
Risk Assessment oe

Risk Treatment Selects and implements appropriate controls for the identified risks

Ensures appropriate controls are implemented to handle known risks and calculates the
Risk Tracking chances of a new risk occurring

Risk Review Evaluates the performance of the implemented risk management strategies

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Risk Management

Risk management is the process of identifying, assessing, responding to, and implementing the
activities that control how the organization manages the potential effects of risk. It has a
prominent place throughout the security life\cycle and is a continuous and ever-increasing
complex process. The types of risks vary-~ffom organization to organization, but the act of
preparing a risk management plan is common to all organizations.

Risk Management Objectives

= Identify potential risks—this is the main objective of risk management

= Identify the impact of risks and help the organization develop better risk management
Strategies and plans

= Prioritize the risks, depending on the impact or severity of the risk, and use established
risk management methods, tools, and techniques to assist in this task

= Understand and analyze the risks and report identified risk events.

= Control the risk and mitigate its effect.

= Create awareness among the security staff and develop strategies and plans for lasting
risk management strategies.

Risk management is a continuous process performed by achieving goals at every phase. It helps
reduce and maintain risk at an acceptable level utilizing a well-defined and actively employed
security program. This process is applied in all stages of the organization, for example, to
specific network locations in both strategic and operational contexts.

Module 01 Page 76 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

The four key steps commonly termed as risk management phases are:

Risk Identification

Risk Assessment

Risk Treatment

Risk Tracking and Review

Every organization should follow the above steps while performing the risk management process.

Risk Identification

The initial step of the risk management plan. Its main aim is to identify the risks—
including the sources, causes, and consequences of the internal and external risks
affecting the security of the organization before they cause harm. The risk identification
process depends on the skill set of the people, and it differs from one organization to
another.

Risk Assessment

This phase assesses the organization’s risks and estimates the likelihood and impact of
those risks. Risk assessment is an ongoing iterative process that assigns priorities for risk
mitigation and implementation plans, which in turn help to determine the quantitative
and qualitative value of risk. Every organization should adopt a risk evaluation process in
order to detect, prioritize, and remove risks.

The risk assessment determines the kind of risks present, their likelihood and severity,
and the priorities and plans for risk control. Organizations perform a risk assessment
when they identify a hazard but are-not able to control it immediately. A risk assessment
is followed by a regular update of all information facilities.

Risk Treatment

Risk treatment is the process of selecting and implementing appropriate controls on the
identified risks in order to modify them. The risk treatment method addresses and
treats the risks according to their severity level. Decisions made in this phase are based
on the results of a risk assessment. The purpose of this step is to identify treatments for
the risks that fall outside the department’s risk tolerance and provide an understanding
of the level of risk with controls and treatments. It identifies the priority order in which
individual risks should be treated, monitored, and reviewed. The following information
is needed before treating the risk:

o The appropriate method of treatment

o The people responsible for the treatment

o The costs involved

o The benefits of treatment

o The likelihood of success

o Ways to measure and assess the treatment

Module 01 Page 77 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= Risk Tracking and Review

An effective risk management plan requires a tracking and review structure to ensure
effective identification and assessment of the risks as well as the use of appropriate
controls and responses. The tracking and review process should determine the
measures and procedures adopted and ensure that the information gathered to
perform the assessment was appropriate. The review phase evaluates the performance
of the implemented risk management strategies. Performing regular inspections of
policies and standards, as well as regularly reviewing them, helps to identify the
opportunities for improvement. Further, the monitoring process ensures that there are
appropriate controls in place for the organization’s activities and that all procedures are
understood and followed.

Module 01 Page 78 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

35 Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Cybe r Threat Intellig ence Types of Threat Intelligence

ZN Strategic (~ Tactical )
Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) is defined as
the collection and analysis of information ® . ore a ° are on attackers
about threats and adversaries and the drawing = ging
of patterns that provide the ability to make s * Consumed by high- * Consumed by IT Service
knowledgeable decisions for preparedness, to level Executives and and SOC Managers,
prevention, and response actions against 8 Management Administrators
various cyber-attacks Ny. TS

2 Operational (~ Technical )
o

Cyber threat intelligence helps the organization to s Information on a specific * Information on specific
identify and mitigate various business risks by E incoming attack indicators of
converting unknown threats into known threats; it b= Consumed by Security compromise
helps in implementing various advanced and Es Managers and Network - Consumed by SOC
proactive defense strategies x Defenders Staff and IR Teams

or
c High-Level Low-Level >

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Cyber Threat Intelligence

According to the Oxford dictionary, a threat is definedods “the possibility of a malicious attempt
to damage or disrupt a computer network or system.” A threat is a potential occurrence of an
undesired event that can eventually damage and interrupt the operational and functional
activities of an organization. A threat canxaffect the integrity and availability factors of an
organization. The impact of threats is very great and may affect the state of the physical IT
assets in an organization. The existence of threats may be accidental, intentional, or due to the
impact of some action.

Cyber threat intelligence, usually known as CTI, is the collection and analysis of information
about threats and adversaries and the drawing up of patterns that provide an ability to make
knowledgeable decisions for preparedness, prevention, and response actions against various
cyberattacks. It is the process of recognizing or discovering any “unknown threats” that an
organization may face so that necessary defense mechanisms can be applied to avoid such
occurrences. It involves collecting, researching, and analyzing trends and_ technical
developments in the field of cyber threats (including cybercrime, hacktivism, and espionage).
Any knowledge about threats that results in an organization’s planning and decision-making to
handle it is a piece of threat Intelligence. The main aim of CTI is to make the organization aware
of existing or emerging threats and prepare them to develop a proactive cybersecurity posture
in advance of exploitation. This process, where unknown threats are converted into possibly
known ones, helps to anticipate the attack before it can happen, and ultimately results in a
better and more secure system. Thus, threat Intelligence is useful in achieving secure data
Sharing and global transactions among organizations.

Threat intelligence processes can be used to identify the risk factors that are responsible for
malware attacks, SQL injections, web application attacks, data leaks, phishing, denial-of-service

Module 01 Page 79 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

attack, and other attacks. Such risks, after being filtered out, can be put on a checklist and
handled appropriately. Threat intelligence is beneficial for an organization to handle cyber
threats with effective planning and execution. Along with a thorough analysis of the threat, CTI
also strengthens the organization’s defense system, creates awareness about impending risks,
and aids in responding against such risks.

Types of Threat Intelligence

Threat intelligence is contextual information that describes threats and guides organizations in
making various business decisions. It is extracted from a huge collection of sources and
information. It provides operational insight by looking outside the organization and issuing
alerts on evolving threats to the organization. For the better management of information that is
collected from different sources, it is important to subdivide threat intelligence into different
types. This subdivision is performed based on the consumers and goals of the intelligence. From
the perspective of consumption, threat intelligence is divided into four different types. They
are, namely, strategic, tactical, operational, and technical threat intelligence. These four types
differ in terms of data collection, data analysis, and intelligence consumption.

= Strategic Threat Intelligence

Strategic threat intelligence provides high-level information regarding cybersecurity
posture, threats, details about the financial impact of various cyber activities, attack
trends, and the impact of high-level business decisions. This information is consumed by
the high-level executives and management of the organization, such as IT management
and CISO. It helps the management to identify current cyber risks, unknown future risks,
threat groups, and attribution of breaches. The intelligence obtained provides a risk-
based view that mainly focuses on high-level concepts of risks and their probability. It
mainly deals with long-term issues and provides real-time alerts for threats to the
organization’s critical assets, such as IT infrastructure, employees, customers, and
applications. This intelligence is used by the management to make strategic business
decisions and to analyze their effect. Based on the analysis, the management can
allocate sufficient budget and staff to protect critical IT assets and business processes.

Strategic threat intelligence is generally in the form of a report that mainly focuses on
high-level business strategies. Since the characteristic of strategic threat intelligence is
preeminent, the data collection also relates to high-level sources and requires highly
skilled professionals to extract information. This intelligence is collected from sources
such as OSINT, CTI vendors, and ISAOs and ISACs.

The strategic threat intelligence helps organizations identify any similar past incidents,
their intentions, and any attributes that might identify the attacking adversaries, why
the organization is within the scope of the attack, major attack trends, and how to
reduce the risk level.

Generally, strategic threat intelligence includes the following information:

o The financial impact of cyber activity

o Attribution for intrusions and data breaches

Module 01 Page 80 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

o Threat actors and attack trends

o The threat landscape for various industry sectors

o Statistical information on data breaches, data theft, and malware

o Geopolitical conflicts involving various cyberattacks

o Information on how adversary TTPs change over time

o Industry sectors that might impact due to high-level business decisions

"= Tactical Threat Intelligence

Tactical threat intelligence plays a major role in protecting the resources of the
organization. It provides information related to the TTPs used by threat actors
(attackers) to perform attacks. Tactical threat intelligence is consumed by cybersecurity
professionals such as IT service managers, security operations managers, network
operations center (NOC) staff, administrators, and architects. It helps the cybersecurity
professionals understand how the adversaries are expected to perform their attack on
the organization, identify the information leakage from the organization, and assess the
technical capabilities and goals of the attackers along with the attack vectors. Using
tactical threat intelligence, security personnel develop detection and mitigation
Strategies beforehand through procedures such as updating security products with
identified indicators and patching vulnerable systems.

The collection sources for tactical threat intelligence include campaign reports,
malware, incident reports, attack group reports, and human intelligence, among other
information. This intelligence is generally obtained by reading white or technical papers,
communicating with other organizations, or purchasing intelligence from third parties. It
includes highly technical information on topics such as malware, campaigns, techniques,
and tools in the form of forensic reports.

Tactical threat intelligence provides day-to-day operational support by helping analysts
assess various security incidents related to events, investigations, and other activities. It
also guides the high-level executives of the organizations in making strategic business
decisions.

= Operational Threat Intelligence

Operational threat intelligence provides information about specific threats against the
organization. It provides contextual information about security events and incidents that
help defenders disclose potential risks, provide greater insight into attacker
methodologies, identify past malicious activities, and perform investigations on
malicious activity in a more efficient way. It is consumed by security managers or heads
of incident response, network defenders, security forensics, and fraud detection teams.
It helps organizations to understand the possible threat actors and their intention,
capability, and opportunity to attack vulnerable IT assets and the impact of a successful
attack. In many cases, only government organizations can collect this type of
intelligence. However, doing so helps IR and forensic teams to deploy security assets to

Module 01 Page 81 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

identify and stop upcoming attacks, improve early-stage attack detecting capability, and
reduce an attack’s damage to IT assets.

Operational threat intelligence is generally collected from sources such as humans,
social media, and chat rooms; it may and also be collected from the real-world activities
and events that result in cyberattacks. Operational threat intelligence is obtained by
analyzing human behavior, threat groups, and by similar means. This information helps
to predict future attacks and thus enhances incident response plans and mitigation
Strategies. Operational threat intelligence generally appears as a report that contains
identified malicious activities, recommended courses of action, and warnings of
emerging attacks.

Technical Threat Intelligence

Technical threat intelligence provides information about resources an attacker uses to
perform an attack; this includes command and control channels, tools, and other items.
It has a shorter lifesoan compared to tactical threat intelligence and mainly focuses ona
specific loC. It provides rapid distribution and response to threats. For example, a piece
of malware used to perform an attack is tactical threat intelligence, whereas the details
related to the specific implementation of the malware come under technical threat
intelligence. Other examples of technical threat intelligence include the specific IP
addresses and domains used by malicious endpoints, phishing email headers, and hash
checksums of malware, among others. Technical threat intelligence is consumed by SOC
staff and IR teams.

The indicators of technical threatNintelligence are collected from active campaigns,
attacks that are performed on other organizations, or data feeds provided by external
third parties. These indicators are generally collected as part of investigations of attacks
performed on various organizations. This information helps security professionals add
the identified indicators to the defensive systems such as IDS and IPS, firewalls, and
endpoint security systems, thereby enhancing the detection mechanisms used to
identify the attacks at an early stage. It also helps them identify malicious traffic and IP
addresses suspected of spreading malware and spam emails. This intelligence is directly
fed into the security devices in digital format to block and identify inbound and
outbound malicious traffic entering the organization’s network.

Module 01 Page 82 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

36 Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council C\EH”

Threat Intelligence Lifecycle
5. Dissemination and Integration 1. Planning and Direction

* Deliver the intelligence to the intended consumers Define intelligence requirements
at different levels

1 * Make a collection plan
Strategic (High-Level Business Strategies) 5 * Form an intelligence team
Tactical (TTPs) * Send requests for data collection
Operational (Specific Threats) Threat * Plan and set requirements for other phases

Technical (loCs) ;
Intelligence

z y ‘ 2. Collection
4. Analysis and Production 4 Lifecycle

= Collect required data that satisfies intelligence goals
* Combine information from phase 3 into a s eseioaaenmenieaide

single entity
* Include facts, findings, and forecasts 3 * OSINT
= Analysis should be * HUMINT

Objective * IMINT
Timely —— * MASINT, etc.

Accurate ;
Actionable 3. Processing and Exploitation

* Perform confidence-based analysis * Process raw data for exploitation

Convert processed data into usable format for data
analysis

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

Threat Intelligence Lifecycle

The threat intelligence lifecycle is a continuous process of developing intelligence from raw
data that supports organizations to develop defensive mechanisms to thwart emerging risks
and threats. The higher-level executives of theorganization will provide continuous support to
the intelligence team by evaluating and giving feedback at every stage.

The threat intelligence lifecycle consists’ of five phases: planning and direction, collection,
processing and exploitation, analysis and production, and dissemination and integration.

= Planning and Direction

In this phase, proper plan is developed based on the strategic intelligence requirement,
for example, what are the requirements for developing the threat intelligence, which
intelligence information should be given priority, etc. This phase defines the entire
intelligence program from data collection to delivery of final intelligence product and
acts as a basis for the complete intelligence process. It also includes identifying the
requirements of data, methods to be used to collect data, and establishing a collection
plan. The requirements are set in such a way that effective and genuine intelligence
data can be gathered using the constant number of resources from various open
sources of intelligence (OSINT). Along with the requirements, requests are sent to
collect data from various internal and external sources. During this phase, an
intelligence team is formed, and their key roles and responsibilities are also formulated.
Also, the planning and requirements are set for the later stages of the cycle to provide
proper support for its functioning.

Module 01 Page 83 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EG-Gouncil
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Collection

In this phase, we need to focus more on collecting the desired intelligence that is
defined in phase one. The data can be collected in different ways through either
technical or human means. The collection of the information can be performed directly
or secretly based on the confidentiality of the information. The intelligence is collected
through sources like human intelligence (HUMINT), imagery intelligence (IMINT),
measurement and signature intelligence (MASINT), signal intelligence (SIGNT), open
source intelligence (OSINT), and loCs, and other third parties. This includes collecting
data from critical applications, network infrastructure, security infrastructure, etc. Once
the collection process is done, the data is transferred for processing in the next stage.

Processing and Exploitation

Until this phase, the data is not in a proper format, and it is in the form of raw data. The
data obtained from previous phases is processed for exploitation and transformed into
useful information that could be understood by the consumers. The raw data is
converted into meaningful information by highly trained professionals using
sophisticated technology and tools. This interpreted data is converted into a usable
format that can be directly used in the data analysis phase. The processing to be
effective requires proper understanding of the data collection plan, requirements of the
consumer, analytical strategy, and types of data that are being processed. Many
automated tools are used to apply data processing functions such as structuring,
decryption, language translation, parsing, data reduction, filtering, data correlation, and
data aggregation.

Analysis and Production

After processing the intelligence into a proper format, analyzing the intelligence for
getting refined information is performed in this phase. The analysis includes facts,
findings, and forecasts, which enable the estimation and anticipation of attacks and
results. The analysis should be objective, timely, accurate, and actionable. To extract
timely and accurate information, analysts need to implement four types of reasoning
techniques, which include deduction, induction, abduction, and scientific method based
on confidence. As the information is obtained from different sources, analysts try to
combine these various sources into a single entity in this phase.

The raw data is converted into information by applying various data analysis techniques
such as qualitative and quantitative analyses, machine-based techniques, and statistical
methods. When the analyzed information provides sufficient context for identifying a
threat, then it is elevated to intelligence. This phase identifies potential threats to the
organization and further helps in developing appropriate countermeasures to respond
to the identified threats.

Dissemination and Integration

The analyzed information is then ready for the integration and distribution to the
intended consumers, which is done either by automated means or by manual methods.

Module 01 Page 84 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Major threat information types that are generally used for dissemination include threat
indicators, adversary TTPs, security alerts, threat intelligence reports, and tool
configuration information for using tools to automate all the phases of threat
intelligence. Different intelligence reports are generated to meet the requirements of
the management and higher-level executives at strategic, operational, tactical, and
technical levels.

The strategic threat intelligence is consumed by high-level executives and management
and focuses on high-level business strategies. The operational threat intelligence is
consumed by cyber security professionals such as security managers and network
defenders and mainly focuses on specific threats to the organizations. The tactical
threat intelligence is consumed by cyber security professionals such as IT service and
SOC managers, administrators and architects and focuses on adversary’s TTPs. The
technical threat intelligence is consumed by SOC staff and IR teams and includes
information related to the identified loCs. The disseminated intelligence helps
organizations in building defensive and mitigation strategies for the identified threats.
Sharing threat intelligence internally and externally helps the organizations gain
situational awareness and also to enhance the current security posture and risk
management processes.

This phase also provides feedback giving more inputs to the information requirements
thereby repeating the threat intelligence lifecycle. The feedback is an assessment that
describes whether the extracted intelligence meets the requirements of the intelligence
consumer. This feedback helps in producing more accurate intelligence through relevant
and timely assessments.

Module 01 Page 85 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

37 Mo01| Idntrouductlioen to EBhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Threat Modeling
Threat modeling is a risk assessment approach for analyzing the security of an application by capturing, organizing, and analyzing all the
information that affects the security of an application

Threat Modeling Process

tens ecny Helps to determine how much effort needs to be put toward subsequent steps
Objectives

Application ; y
Cracivices Identify the components, data flows, and trust boundaries

Decompose the . z
Application Helps to find more relevant and more detailed threats

Identify Identify threats relevant to the control scenario and context using the information obtained in
Threats steps 2 and 3

IVdiseinntoifryabllidios Identify weaknesses related to the threats found using vulnerability categories

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Threat Modeling

Threat modeling is a risk assessment approach for analyzing the security of an application by
capturing, organizing, and analyzing all the information that affects it. The threat model consists
of three major building blocks: understanding.the adversary’s perspective, characterizing the
security of the system, and determining thfeats. Every application should have a developed and
documented threat model that should bevrevisited as the application evolves and development
progresses.

Threat modeling helps to:

= Identify relevant threats to a particular application scenario

= Identify key vulnerabilities in an application’s design

= Improve security design

When using this approach, an administrator should keep the following in mind:

= Try not to be rigid about specific steps or implementations; instead, focus on the
approach. If any step becomes impassable, go right to step 4 of the threat modeling
process and identify the problem.

= Use scenarios to scope the modeling activity.

=» Use existing design documents. Use items like documented use cases or use stories,
architectural diagrams, data flow diagrams, or other design documentation.

= Start with a whiteboard before capturing information in documents or getting lost in
details. It may be helpful to use a digital camera with printing capabilities to document
and distribute the information from the whiteboard.

Module 01 Page 86 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Use an iterative approach. Add more details and improve the threat model as design
and development continue. This will help with becoming familiar with the modeling
process and developing the threat model to better examine more possible scenarios.

Obtain input about the host and network constraints from the system and network
administrators. To better understand the end-to-end deployment diagram, obtain as
much information as possible about host configurations, firewall policies, allowed
protocols and ports, and other relevant details.

The threat modeling process involves five steps:

1. Identify Security Objectives

Security objectives are the goals and constraints related to the application’s
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Security-specific objectives guide the threat
modeling efforts and help to determine how much effort needs to be put toward
subsequent steps. To identify security objectives, administrators should ask the
following questions:

o What data should be protected?

o Arethere any compliance requirements?

o Arethere specific quality-of-service requirement?s 

o Arethere intangible assets to protect?

2. Application Overview

Identify the components, data flows, and trust boundaries. To draw the end-to-end
deployment scenario, the administrator should use a whiteboard. First, they should
draw a rough diagram that explains the workings and structure of the application, its
subsystems, and its deployment characteristics. The deployment diagram should
contain the following:

o End-to-end deployment topology

o Logical layers

Oo Key components

Oo Key services

o Communication ports and protocols

o Identities

o External dependencies

Identify Roles

The administrator should identify people and the roles and actions they can perform
within the application. For example, are there higher-privileged groups of users? Who
can read data? Who can update data? Who can delete data?

Module 01 Page 87 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Identify Key Usage Scenarios

The administrator should use the application’s use cases to determine its objective. Use
cases explain how the application is used and misused.

Identify Technologies

The administrator should list the technologies and key features of the software, as well
as the following technologies in use:

Oo Operating systems

o Webserver software

o Database server software

o Technologies for presentation, business, and data access layers

o Development languages

Identifying these technologies helps to focus on technology-specific threats.

Identify Application Security Mechanisms

The administrator should identify some key points regarding the following:

o Input and data validation

o Authorization and authentication

o Sensitive data

o Configuration management

Oo Session management

Oo Parameter manipulation

o Cryptography

o Exception management

o Auditing and logging

These efforts aim to identify relevant details and to add details where required, or to
identify areas that require more.

3. Decompose the Application

In this step, the administrator breaks down the application to identify the trust
boundaries, data flows, entry points, and exit points. Doing so makes it considerably
easier to find more relevant and more detailed threats and vulnerabilities.

Identify Trust Boundaries

Identifying the application’s trust boundaries helps the administrator to focus on the
relevant areas of the application. It indicates where trust levels change.

o Identify outer system boundaries

Module 01 Page 88 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

o Identify access control points or key places where access requires extra privileges or
role membership

o Identify trust boundaries from a data flow perspective

Identify Data Flows

The administrator should list the application’s data input from entry to exit. This helps
to understand how the application communicates with outside systems and clients and
how the internal components interact. They should pay particular attention to the data
flow across trust boundaries and the data validation at the trust boundary entry point. A
good approach is to start at the highest level and then deconstruct the application by
testing the data flow between different subsystems.

Identify Entry Points

The application’s entry point can also serve as an entry point for attacks. All users
interact with the application at these entry points. Other internal entry points
uncovered by subcomponents over the layers of the application may be present only to
Support internal communication with other components. The administrator should
identify these entry points to determine the methods used by an intruder to get in
through them. They should focus on the entry points that allow access to critical
functionalities and provide adequate defense for them.

Identify Exit Points

The administrator should also identify the points where the application transfers data to
the client or external systems. They should prioritize the exit points at which the
application writes data containing ‘elient input or data from untrusted sources, such as a
Shared database.

Identify Threats

The administrator should identify threats relevant to the control scenario and context
using the information obtained in the application overview and decompose application
steps. They should bring members of the development and test teams together to
identify potential threats. The team should start with a list of common threats grouped
by their application vulnerability category. This step uses a question-driven approach to
help identify threats.

Identify Vulnerabilities

A vulnerability is a weakness in an application (deployed in an information system) that
allows attacker exploitation, thereby leading to security breaches. Security
administrators should identify any weaknesses related to the threats found using the
vulnerability categories to identifying vulnerabilities and fix them beforehand to keep
intruders away.

Module 01 Page 89 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

38 Mo01|I dntrouductlioent o  EBhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Incident Management
Incident management is a set of defined processes to identify, analyze, prioritize, and resolve security incidents to restore normal
service operations as quickly as possible and prevent future recurrence of the incident

Incident Management

Vulnerability Handling Incident Handling

Reporting
Artifact Handling Triage and Detection

Incident
Analysis

Announcements Response

Alerts Other Incident Management Services

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information,visit eccouncil.org

Incident Management

Incident management is a set of defined processes toidentify, analyze, prioritize, and resolve
security incidents to restore the system to normal service operations as soon as possible, and
prevent recurrence of the incident. It involves not only responding to incidents but also
triggering alerts to prevent potential riskscand threats. A security administrator must identify
software that is open to attacks before soméone takes advantage of the vulnerabilities.

Incident management includes the following:

= Vulnerability analysis

# Artifact analysis

=" Security awareness training

# Intrusion detection

= Public or technology monitoring

The incident management process is designed to:

= Improve service quality

= Resolve problems proactively

= Reduce the impact of incidents on an organization or its business

= Meet service availability requirements

= Increase staff efficiency and productivity

= Improve user and customer satisfaction

# Assist in handling future incidents

Module 01 Page 90 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Conducting training sessions to spread awareness among users is an important part of incident
management. Such sessions help end-users to recognize suspicious events or incidents easily
and report an attacker’s behavior to the appropriate authority.

The following people perform incident management activities:

= Human resources personnel take steps to fire employees suspected of harmful
computer activities.

= The legal counsel sets the rules and regulations in an organization. These rules can
influence the internal security policies and practices of the organization in case an
insider or an attacker uses the organization’s system for harmful or malicious activities.

= The firewall manager keeps filters in place. These filters are frequently where denial-of-
service attacks are made.

= An outsourced service provider repairs systems infected by viruses and malware.

Incident response is one of the functions performed in incident handling. In turn, incident
handling is one of the services provided as part of incident management. The following diagram
illustrates the relationship between incident response, incident handling, and incident
management

Incident Management

Vulnerability Handling Incident Handling

Reporting

Artifact Handling Triage and Detection

Incident Analvsis
Announcements Response 4

Alerts Other Incident Management Services

Figure 1.10: Block Diagram of Incident Management

Module 01 Page 91 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

39 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Incident Handling and Response
Incident handling and response (IH&R) is the process of taking organized and careful steps when reacting to a security incident or
cyberattack

Steps involved in the IH&R process:

(1) Preparation (7) Eradication

(2) Incident Recording and Assignment Recovery

(G3) Incident Triage
(9) Post-Incident Activities

« Incident Documentation
(4) Notification » Incident Impact Assessment

= Review and Revise Policies

() Contai:n ment « Close the Investigation
* Incident Disclosure

(6) Evidence Gathering and Forensic Analysis

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

Incident Handling and Response

Incident handling and response (IH&R) is the process of taking organized and careful steps
when reacting to a security incident or cyberattack. It is a set of procedures, actions, and
measures taken against an unexpected event\occurrence. It involves logging, recording, and
resolving incidents that take place in the organization. It notes the incident, when it occurred,
its impact, and its cause. It is the practicésof managing the incident response processes, such as
preparation, detection, containment, eradication, and recovery, to overcome the impact of an
incident quickly and efficiently. IH&R processes are important to provide a focused approach
for restoring normal business operations as quickly as possible after an incident and with a
minimal impact on the business.

The IH&R process involves defining user policies, developing protocols, building incident
response teams, auditing organizational assets, planning incident response procedures,
obtaining management approval, incident reporting, prioritization, and managing response. It
also includes establishing proper communication between the individuals responding to an
incident and guiding them to detect, analyze, contain, recover, and prevent incidents.

Discussed below are the steps involved in the IH&R process:

= Step 1: Preparation

The preparation phase includes performing an audit of resources and assets to
determine the purpose of security and define the rules, policies, and procedures that
drive the IH&R process. It also includes building and training an incident response team,
defining incident readiness procedures, and gathering required tools as well as training
the employees to secure their systems and accounts.

Module 01 Page 92 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= Step 2: Incident Recording and Assignment

In this phase, the initial reporting and recording of the incident take place. This phase
handles identifying an incident and defining proper incident communication plans for
the employees and also includes communication methods that involve informing IT
Support personnel or submitting an appropriate ticket.

= Step 3: Incident Triage

In this phase, the identified security incidents are analyzed, validated, categorized, and
prioritized. The IH&R team further analyzes the compromised device to find incident
details such as the type of attack, its severity, target, impact, and method of
propagation, and any vulnerabilities it exploited.

= Step 4: Notification

In the notification phase, the IH&R team informs various stakeholders, including
management, third-party vendors, and clients, about the identified incident.

=» Step 5: Containment

This phase helps to prevent the spread of infection to other organizational assets,
preventing additional damage.

= Step 6: Evidence Gathering and Forensic Analysis

In this phase, the IH&R team accumulates all possible evidence related to the incident
and submits it to the forensic department for investigation. Forensic analysis of an
incident reveals details such as the-*method of attack, vulnerabilities exploited, security
mechanisms averted, network devicés infected, and applications compromised.

= Step 7: Eradication

In the eradication phase, the IH&R team removes or eliminates the root cause of the
incident and closes all the attack vectors to prevent similar incidents in the future.

=» Step 8: Recovery

After eliminating the causes for the incidents, the IH&R team restores the affected
systems, services, resources, and data through recovery. It is the responsibility of the
incident response team to ensure that that the incident causes no disruption to the
services or business of the organization.

= Step 9: Post-Incident Activities

Once the process is complete, the security incident requires additional review and
analysis before closing the matter. Conducting a final review is an important step in the
IH&R process that includes:

o Incident documentation o Closing the investigation

o Incident impact assessment o Incident disclosure

o Reviewing and revising policies

Module 01 Page 93 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

40 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Role of Aland MLin Cyber Security
Machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (Al) are now vastly used across various industries and applications due to the increase in
computing power, data collection, and storage capabilities

ML is an unsupervised self-learning system that is used to define what the normal network looks like, along with its devices, and then to
backtrack and report any deviations or anomalies in real-time

Al and ML in cyber security helps in identifying new exploits and weaknesses, which can then be easily analyzed to mitigate further attacks

Machine Learning

* ML classification techniques:

* Supervised learning makes use of V V
algorithms that input a set of
labeled training data, with the aim Unsupervised Learning Supervised Learning
of learning the differences between
the labels

« Unsupervised learning makes use of Dimensionality Classification <—
algorithms that input unlabeled ——> Reduction
training data, with the aim of
deducing all categories by itself

—>  Clustering Regression —|

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Role of AI and ML in Cyber Security

Machine learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (Al) are now popularly used across various
industries and applications due to the increaseyin computing power, data collection, and
Storage Capabilities.

Along with technological advancements\in-Al, such as self-driving cars, language translators,
and big data, there is also a rise in threats such as ransomware, botnets, malware, and phishing.
Using Al and ML in cybersecurity helps to identify new exploits and weaknesses, which can be
easily analyzed to mitigate further attacks. It reduces the pressure on security professionals and
alerts them whenever an action is needed.

What are Al and ML?

Artificial Intelligence is the only solution to defend networks against the various attacks that an
antivirus scan cannot detect. A huge amount of collected data is fed into the Al, which
processes and analyzes it to understand its details and trends.

ML is a branch of artificial intelligence (Al) that gives the systems the ability to self-learn
without any explicit programs. This self-learning system is used to define what the normal
network, along with its devices, looks like, and then uses this to backtrack and report any
deviations or anomalies in real-time.

Module 01 Page 94 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

There are two types of ML classification techniques:

Supervised Learning

Supervised learning uses algorithms that input a set of labeled training data to attempt
to learn the differences between the given labels. Supervised learning is further divided
into two subcategories, namely, classification and regression. Classification includes
completely divided classes. Its main task is to define the test sample to identify its class.
Regression is used when data classes are not separated, such as when the data is
continuous.

Unsupervised Learning

Unsupervised learning makes use of algorithms that input unlabeled training data to
attempt to deduce all the categories without guidance. Unsupervised learning is further
divided into two subcategories, namely, clustering and dimensionality reduction.
Clustering divides the data into clusters based on their similarities, regardless of class
information. Dimensionality reduction is the process of reducing the dimensions
(attributes) of data.

Module 01 Page 95 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

41 Mo01|Idntrouductlioento Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

How Do Aland MLPrevent Cyber Attacks?

(4) Password Protection and
Authentication Network S Security

Phishing Detection and Prevention Al-based Antivirus

Threat Detection Fraud Detection

Vulnerability Management Botnet Detection

Behavioral Analytics Al to Combat Al Threats

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

How Do Al and ML Prevent Cyber Attacks?

Artificial Intelligence (Al), and with it, Machine Learning (ML), is an emerging technology in the
field of cybersecurity. It is widely adopted by“argescale industries such as automation, IT
services, manufacturing, production, and finance. Al plays a crucial role in detecting imminent
cyber threats by incorporating machine learning as a subset.

Following are different ways that Al andNML safeguard industries from cybersecurity attacks:

Password Protection and Authentication: Password credentials play a critical role in
preventing illegitimate access to the organization’s or user’s data. If credentials are
compromised, the reputation of the organization or person could be damaged.
Sometimes, traditional face detection and other biometric security measures can also
be vulnerable to these credential breaches. Programmers use Al to improve biometric
validations and face recognition to thwart such attacks. Al provides the latest models for
recognizing an individual’s face by tracking key correlations and patterns.

Phishing Detection and Prevention: Phishing is a common method attackers employ to
send their payloads via emails. The majority of users cannot figure out which received
emails have a malicious attachment or payload. In this case, Al and ML could play a
pivotal role in identifying and preventing such phishing attacks. They can scan and
identify phishing emails much faster than a human being can. They can also quickly
differentiate malicious websites from legitimate websites.

Threat Detection: Machine learning assists companies in detecting cyber-attacks before
systems are compromised. Being a part of Al, machine learning constantly keeps admins
notified of imminent cyber threats by carrying out logical data analysis. ML allows
systems to run its algorithms upon the data being received, then performs deep learning

Module 01 Page 96 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

©)||©|}©| |@

©) ©) ©)||© ©)



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

on the and comprehends the advancements required to ensure the safety of the
information systems.

=» Vulnerability Management: Al and ML-based systems never allow vulnerability to exist
for long; they dynamically scan for all types of vulnerabilities and alert the admins
before the system is exploited. They can also provide the attacker’s information and the
patterns used to perform the attack. These Al- and ML-based systems can also forecast
how and when a vulnerability exploitation might occur.

=" Behavioral Analytics: Another notable security improvement by artificial intelligence is
“Behavioral Analytics.” Attackers who have stolen the credentials of a legitimate user
can perform malicious activities on the organization’s network; such attempts are
difficult to detect and thwart. Here, Al with ML generates specific user patterns based
on their regular usage. Al software instantly alerts the admin if it detects any suspicious
activity or deviation in regular usage.

= Network Security: Two significant factors of network security are generating
comprehensive security policies and mapping an enterprise’s network topology.
Unfortunately, both of these factors are time-consuming. Therefore, administrators are
adopting Al to enhance this operation; it can carry out the network traffic analysis and
propose efficient security policies by default.

=" Al-based Antivirus: Traditional antivirus “tools perform file scanning on the
organization’s networks to check if any’signatures match those of known viruses or
malware. The issue with this is that antivirus tools must be updated when the user
wants to scan for new malware “or-viruses. Updating is time-consuming, and new
deployment often takes a certain amount of time. To overcome these issues,
organizations employ Al-based‘antiviruses, which use anomaly detection to understand
programs’ behavior. Al-based antivirus detects suspicious program behavior instead of
matching signatures for viruses.

= Fraud Detection: Al and ML algorithms carry out anomaly detection to identify payment
inconsistencies and fraudulent transactions. They also perform automated pattern
discovery across different transactions. ML can easily differentiate between authentic
and illegitimate transactions and blocks fraudulent transactions.

= Botnet Detection: Botnets can bypass the Intrusion Detection System (IDS) by
leveraging its ineffectiveness in matching signatures. Botnets can be embedded using a
highly sophisticated code that makes them _ untraceable by traditional IDS
implementations. Hence, security professionals use Al and ML algorithms that alert
about the suspicious behavior of a network and detect unauthorized intrusions.

= Al to Combat Al Threats: Attackers can also leverage Al technology to make their way
into an organization’s network; such cyber threats must be detected immediately. Al
software can detect such imminent Al-augmented attacks before the network is
compromised.

Module 01 Page 97 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

42 Mo014| Idntrouductlioen to Bhical Hacking EC-Council ad

Objective

Explain the Importance of
Applicable Security Laws and

Standards

Information Security Laws and Standards

Laws are a system of rules and guidelines that are enforced by a particular country or
community to govern behavior. A Standard is a’“document established by consensus and
approved by a recognized body that provides,for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines,
or characteristics for activities or their results, aimed at the achievement of the optimum
degree of order in a given context.” Fhis section deals with the various laws and standards
dealing with information security in different countries.

Module 01 Page 98 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

43 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Payment Card Industry Data Security
Standard (PCI DSS)

The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a proprietary information security standard for organizations that handle
cardholder information for major debit, credit, prepaid, e-purse, ATM, and POS cards

PCI DSS applies to all entities involved in payment card processing — including merchants, processors, acquirers, issuers, and service
providers, as well as all other entities that store, process, or transmit cardholder data

PCI Data Security Standard - High Level Overview

Build and Maintain a Secure Network Implement Strong Access Control Measures

Protect Cardholder Data Regularly Monitor and Test Networks

Maintain a Vulnerability Management Program Maintain an Information Security Policy

https://www. pcisecuritystandards.org

Failure to meet the PCI DSS requirements may result in fines or the termination of payment card processing privileges

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)

Source: https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org

The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a proprietary information
Security standard for organizations that handl/é cardholder information for the major debit,
credit, prepaid, e-purse, ATM, and POS.cards. This standard offers robust and comprehensive
Standards and supporting materials toxenhance payment card data security. These materials
include a framework of specifications, tools, measurements, and support resources to help
organizations ensure the safe handling of cardholder information. PCI DSS applies to all entities
involved in payment card processing, including merchants, processors, acquirers, issuers, and
service providers, as well as all other entities that store, process or transmit cardholder data.
PCI DSS comprises a minimum set of requirements for protecting cardholder data. The Payment
Card Industry (PCI) Security Standards Council has developed and maintains a_ high-level
overview of PCI DSS requirements.

Module 01 Page 99 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

PCI Data Security Standard -— High Level Overview

Build and Maintain a Secure Install and maintain a firewall configurationto protect cardholder data
Network Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and other security parameters

Protect stored cardholder data
Protect Cardholder Data

Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public networks

Maintain a Vulnerability Use and regularly update anti-virus software or programs
Management Program Develop and maintain secure systems and applications

Restrict access to cardholder data by business need to know
Implement Strong Access

Assign a unique D to each person with computer access
Control Measures

Restrict physical access to cardholderdata

Regularly Monitor and Test Track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder data
Networks Regularly test security systems and processes

Maintain an Information
Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel

mia sia Aelia,

Table 1.6: Table Showing the PCI Data Security Standard—High-Level Overview

Failure to meet PCI DSS requirements may result in fines or the termination of payment-card
processing privileges.

Module 01 Page 100 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

44 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council C\EH”

ISO/IEC Standards
Standard Description

Specifies the requirements and a framework for establishing, implementing, maintaining, and continually improving an
ae Information Security Management System (ISMS)

Extends ISO/IEC 27001 to include privacy management, focusing on protecting PIl and implementing a Privacy Information
ISOMEC 27701:2019 Management System (PIMS)

Outlines best practices and control objectives for critical cybersecurity areas, including access control, cryptography, and
ISO/IEC 27002:2022 security personnel

Provides guidelines for information security risk management to support the requirements of an ISMS as specified in ISO/IEC
ISO/IEC 27005:2022 27001

ISO/IEC 27018:2019 Offers code of practice specifically focused on the protection of personally identifiable information (Pll) in public clouds

Explains the relationship between internet, web, network security, and cybersecurity, providing an overview of internet security, and
a aS identifying key stakeholders and their roles
ISOMEC 27033-7:2023 Proposes guidelines for the implementation of network virtualization security

ISO/IEC 27036-3:2023 Provides guidelines for securing hardware, software, and services supply chains

Provides technical requirements and guidance for achieving data storage security through planning, design, documentation, and
ISO/IEC 27040:2024 implementation

https://www.iso.org

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information, visit eccouncil.org

ISO/IEC Standards

Source: https://www.iso.org

ISO/IEC 27701:2022

ISO/IEC 27001:2022 is an international standard for Information Security Management Systems
(ISMS). It specifies the requirements. and framework for establishing, implementing,
maintaining, and continually improving an ISMS to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of information. This standard helps organizations manage security risks and protect
sensitive information, including financial data, intellectual property, employee details, and
information entrusted by third parties.

The standard is designed to be applicable for various purposes:

= Providing a structured approach for identifying, assessing, and managing information
security risks.

= Helping organizations comply with regulatory, legal, and contractual obligations
regarding information security.

= Strengthening information security posture, thereby reducing the risk of breaches and
incidents.

= Continuously enhancing security practices, ensuring that the ISMS adapts to new threats
and organizational changes.

"= Building trust with customers, partners, and other stakeholders by demonstrating
commitment to information security.

Module 01 Page 101 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Providing a competitive edge by showcasing robust information security practices that
can be market differentiators.

Supporting digitization strategies by integrating information security measures into
digital business processes and technologies.

Addressing security challenges associated with remote working and "bring your own
device" (BYOD) policies, reflecting modern workplace practices.

Including controls relevant to Industry 4.0 technologies and cloud-based services,
ensuring that security measures keep pace with technological advancements.

Introducing requirements for effective communication of information security roles and
responsibilities within the organization.

Other Relevant ISO/IEC Standards

ISO/IEC 27701:2019

ISO/IEC 27701:2019 extends the ISO/IEC 27001 framework to include privacy
management, specifically focusing on protecting personally identifiable information (PII).
It provides guidelines for implementing a private information management system
(PIMS) to help organizations effectively manage privacy risks. Adopting this standard
enables organizations to build stakeholder trust;.enhance data protection, comply with
global privacy regulations, and seamlessly integrate existing information security
practices.

ISO/IEC 27002:2022

ISO/IEC 27002:2022 outlines the, best practices and control objectives for critical
cybersecurity areas such as access control, cryptography, and security personnel. This
paper offers a comprehensive framework for implementing effective security controls to
protect sensitive information and ensure regulatory compliance. Adhering to ISO/IEC
27002:2022 helps organizations strengthen their cybersecurity posture, mitigate risks,
and enhance overall information security management processes, fostering a secure
operational environment.

ISO/IEC 27005:2022

ISO/IEC 27005:2022 provides comprehensive guidelines for information security risk
management and supports the ISMS requirements specified in ISO/IEC 27001. It aids
organizations in developing a structured framework for conducting thorough and
effective information security risk assessments. Following ISO/IEC 27005:2022,
organizations can systematically identify, evaluate, and manage security risks, enhance
their ability to protect sensitive information, and maintain robust security postures.

ISO/IEC 27018:2019

ISO/IEC 27018:2019 offers a code of practice that focuses on PII in public cloud
environments. This paper provides guidelines for implementing cloud-specific controls
designed to safeguard personal data. Adhering to ISO/IEC 27018:2019 ensures robust PII

Module 01 Page 102 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

protection in cloud services, enhances data privacy measures, and builds trust with
stakeholders by relying on the secure handling of their personal information.

ISO/IEC 27032:2023

ISO/IEC 27032:2023 explains the relationship among the Internet, Web, network
security, and cybersecurity, providing a comprehensive overview of Internet security and
identifying key stakeholders and their roles. This standard assists organizations in
enhancing their cybersecurity posture by addressing common Internet security issues
and fostering coordinated security efforts among stakeholders. Implementing these
guidelines improves resilience against cyber threats and ensures a secure, collaborative
approach for managing Internet security challenges.

ISO/IEC 27033-7:2023

ISO/IEC 27033-7:2023 provides comprehensive guidelines for the implementation
network virtualization security. It helps organizations secure and manage virtualization
environments and mitigates the associated security risks. By adhering to this standard,
organizations can effectively address potential threats and vulnerabilities specific to
virtual networks, ensure robust protection, and maintain high security and operational
integrity while leveraging virtualization technologies.

ISO/IEC 27036-3:2023

ISO/IEC 27036-3:2023 offers detailed guidelines for securing hardware, software, and
services supply chains. This standard helps organizations mitigate supply chain security
risks by ensuring the secure acquisition and integration of products and services.
Following this standard, organizations can establish robust security practices throughout
their supply chain, enhancing‘ resilience against potential threats and vulnerabilities
associated with third-party products and services, and thereby maintaining operational
integrity in a digital environment.

ISO/IEC 27040:2024

ISO/IEC 27040:2024 provides the detailed technical requirements and guidance for
achieving data storage security through careful planning, design, documentation, and
implementation. It helps organizations mitigate the risks associated with data storage by
applying consistent security measures across various storage devices, media, and
networks. Adherence to this standard ensures the integrity, confidentiality, and
availability of stored data, thereby enhancing overall data protection. This standard
Supports a comprehensive and systematic approach to secure data storage and
effectively addresses potential vulnerabilities and threats.

Module 01 Page 103 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

45 Mo01|Idntrouductlioento Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA)

HIPAA's Administrative Simplification Statute and Rules

Electronic Transaction Requires every provider who does business electronically to use the same health care transactions,
and Code Set Standards code sets, and identifiers

Provides federal protections for the personal health information held by covered entities and gives
Privacy Rule patients an array of rights with respect to that information

Security Specifies a series of administrative, physical, and technical safeguards for covered entities to use to
Rule ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of electronically protected health information

National Identifier Requires that health care providers, health plans, and employers have standard national numbers that
Requirements identify them attached to standard transactions

ESnufeo rcemil ent Provides the standards for enforcing all the Administration Simplification Rules
Attps://www.hhs.gov

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)

Source: https://www.hhs.gov

The HIPAA Privacy Rule provides federal protections for the individually identifiable health
information held by covered entities and theimbUsiness associates and gives patients an array of
rights to that information. At the same time; the Privacy Rule permits the disclosure of health
information needed for patient care and.other necessary purposes.

The Security Rule specifies a series of administrative, physical, and technical safeguards for
covered entities and their business associates to use to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of electronically protected health information.

The office of civil rights implemented HIPAA’s Administrative Simplification Statute and Rules,
as discussed below:

= Electronic Transactions and Code Set Standards: Transactions are electronic exchanges
involving the transfer of information between two parties for specific purposes. The
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) designated certain
types of organizations as covered entities, including health plans, health care
clearinghouses, and certain health care providers. In the HIPAA regulations, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) adopted certain standard transactions for
the Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) of health care data. These transactions are claims
and encounter information, payment and remittance advice, claim status, eligibility,
enrollment and disenrollment, referrals and authorizations, coordination of benefits,
and premium payment. Under HIPAA, if a covered entity electronically conducts one of
the adopted transactions, they must use the adopted standard—either from ASC, X12N,
or NCPDP (for certain pharmacy transactions). Covered entities must adhere to the

Module 01 Page 104 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

content and format requirements of each transaction. Every provider who does business
electronically must use the same health care transactions, code sets, and identifiers.

= Privacy Rule: The HIPAA Privacy Rule establishes national standards to protect people’s
medical records and other personal health information and applies to health plans,
health care clearinghouses, and health care providers that conduct certain health care
transactions electronically. The rule requires appropriate safeguards to protect the
privacy of personal health information. It sets limits and conditions on the uses and
disclosures that may be made of such information without patient authorization. The
rule also gives patients’ rights over their health information, including the right to
examine and obtain a copy of their health records and to request corrections.

=" Security Rule: The HIPAA Security Rule establishes national standards to protect
individuals’ electronic personal health information that is created, received, used, or
maintained by a covered entity. The Security Rule requires appropriate administrative,
physical, and technical safeguards to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and security of
electronically protected health information.

= Employer Identifier Standard: The HIPAA requires that each employer has a standard
national number that identifies them on standard transactions.

= National Provider Identifier Standard (NPI): Thé National Provider Identifier (NPI) is a
HIPAA Administrative Simplification Standard. Fhe NPI is a unique identification number
assigned to covered health care providers. Covered health care providers and all health
plans and health care clearinghouses\must use the NPls in the administrative and
financial transactions adopted under“HIPAA. The NPI is a 10-position, intelligence-free
numeric identifier (10-digit number). This means that the numbers do not carry other
information about healthcare providers, such as the state in which they live or their
medical specialty.

= Enforcement Rule: The HIPAA Enforcement Rule contains provisions relating to
compliance and investigation, as well as the imposition of civil monetary penalties for
violations of the HIPAA Administrative Simplification Rules and procedures for hearings.

Module 01 Page 105 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

46 Mo01|Idntrouductlioento Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Sarbanes Oxley Act (SOX)
Enacted in 2002, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is designed to protect investors and the public by increasing the accuracy and reliability of
corporate disclosures
The key requirements and provisions of SOX are organized into 11 titles:

Title| Public Company Accounting Oversight Title VI
Board (PCAOB) Commission Resources and Authority

Title II Auditor Independence Title VII Studies and Reports

Title Ill Corporate Responsibility Title VIII ACcocropuonratateb ialintyd Criminal Fraud

Title IV Enhanced Financial Disclosures Title IX White Collar Crime Penalty Enhancement

Title V Analyst Conflicts of Interest Title X Corporate Tax Returns

Attps://WSéWc.gWov. 

Title XI Corporate Fraud Accountability

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Sarbanes Oxley Act (SOX)

Source: https://www.sec.gov

Enacted in 2002, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act aims to protect the public and investors by increasing
the accuracy and reliability of corporate disclosures. This act does not explain how an
organization must store records but describes the records that organizations must store and
the duration of their storage. The,Act’ mandated several reforms to enhance corporate
responsibility, enhance financial disclosures, and combat corporate and accounting fraud.

The key requirements and provisions of SOX are organized into 11 titles:

Title I: Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB): Title | consists of nine
sections and establishes the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to provide
independent oversight of public accounting firms that provide audit services
("auditors"). It also creates a central oversight board tasked with registering audit
services, defining the specific processes and procedures for compliance audits,
inspecting and policing conduct and quality control, and enforcing compliance with the
specific mandates of SOX.

Title Il: Auditor Independence: Title Il consists of nine sections and establishes
Standards for external auditor independence to limit conflicts of interest. It also
addresses new auditor approval requirements, audit partner rotation, and auditor
reporting requirements. It restricts auditing companies from providing non-audit
services (Such as consulting) for the same clients.

Title Il: Corporate Responsibility: Title Ill consists of eight sections and mandates that
senior executives take individual responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of
corporate financial reports. It defines the interaction between external auditors and

Module 01 Page 106 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

corporate audit committees and specifies the corporate officers’ responsibility for the
accuracy and validity of corporate financial reports. It enumerates specific limits on the
behaviors of corporate officers and describes specific forfeitures of benefits and civil
penalties for non-compliance.

Title IV: Enhanced Financial Disclosures: Title IV consists of nine sections. It describes
enhanced reporting requirements for financial transactions, including off-balance-sheet
transactions, pro-forma figures, and the stock transactions of corporate officers. It
requires internal controls to ensure the accuracy of financial reports and disclosures and
mandates both audits and reports on those controls. It also requires timely reporting of
material changes in financial conditions and specific enhanced reviews of corporate
reports by the SEC or its agents.

Title V: Analyst Conflicts of Interest: Title V consists of only one section that discusses
the measures designed to help restore investor confidence in the reporting of securities
analysts. It defines the code of conduct for securities analysts and requires that they
disclose any knowable conflicts of interest.

Title Vi: Commission Resources and Authority: Title VI consists of four sections and
defines practices to restore investor confidence in securities analysts. It also defines the
SEC’s authority to censure or bar securities professionals from practice and defines the
conditions to bar a person from practicing as a.broker, advisor, or dealer.

Title VII: Studies and Reports: Title VN consists of five sections and requires the
Comptroller General and the Securities)and Exchange Commission (SEC) to perform
various studies and to report their findings. The required studies and reports include the
effects of the consolidation of public accounting firms, the role of credit rating agencies
in the operation of securities Markets, securities violations, enforcement actions, and
whether investment banks assisted Enron, Global Crossing, and others to manipulate
earnings and obfuscate true financial conditions.

Title Vill: Corporate and Criminal Fraud Accountability: Title VIII, also known as the
“Corporate and Criminal Fraud Accountability Act of 2002,” consists of seven sections. It
describes specific criminal penalties for the manipulation, destruction, or alteration of
financial records or interference with investigations, while also providing certain
protections for whistle-blowers.

Title IX: White-Collar-Crime Penalty Enhancement: Title IX, also known as the "White
Collar Crime Penalty Enhancement Act of 2002,” consists of six sections. This title
increases the criminal penalties associated with white-collar crimes and conspiracies. It
recommends stronger sentencing guidelines and specifically adds failure to certify
corporate financial reports as a criminal offense.

Title X: Corporate Tax Returns: Title X consists of one section that states that the Chief
Executive Officer should sign the company tax return.

Title Xl: Corporate Fraud Accountability: Title Xl consists of seven sections. Section
1101 recommends the following name for the title: “Corporate Fraud Accountability Act

Module 01 Page 107 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

of 2002.” It identifies corporate fraud and records tampering as criminal offenses and
joins those offenses to specific penalties. It also revises sentencing guidelines and
strengthens penalties. Doing so enables the SEC to temporarily freeze “large” or
“unusual” transactions or payments.

Module 01 Page 108 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

47 Mo01| Idntrouductlioen to  Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and the
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)

The Digital Millennium Federal Information Security
Copyright Act (DMCA) Management Act (FISMA)

The DMCA is a United States copyright law that The FISMA provides a comprehensive framework for ensuring the

implements two 1996 treaties of the World effectiveness of information security controls over

Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) information resources that support Federal operations and assets

2 a It includes
It defines the legal prohibitions against the oe : :
circumvention of technological protection measures * Standards for categorizing information and information systems by

employed by copyright owners to protect their mission impact
works, and against the removal or alteration of * Standards for minimum security requirements for information and
copyright management information information systems

Guidance for selecting appropriate security controls for information
systems

Guidance for assessing security controls in information systems and
determining security control effectiveness

Guidance for security authorization of information systems

Attps://www. copyright. gov Attps://csre.nist.gov

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information,visit eccouncil.org

The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA)

Source: https://www.copyright.gov

The DMCA is an American copyright law that-implements two 1996 treaties from the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO);.the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty. In onder to implement US treaty obligations, the DMCA
defines legal prohibitions against circumvention of the technological protection measures
employed by copyright owners to protect their works, and against the removal or alteration of
copyright management information. The DMCA contains five titles:

= Title 1: WIPO TREATY IMPLEMENTATION: Title | implements the WIPO treaties. First, it
makes certain technical amendments to US law in order to provide the appropriate
references and links to the treaties. Second, it creates two new prohibitions in Title 17
of the U.S. Code—one on circumvention of the technological measures used by
copyright owners to protect their works and one on tampering with copyright
management information—and adds civil remedies and criminal penalties for violating
the prohibitions.

= Title Il: ONLINE COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT LIABILITY LIMITATION: Title II of the DMCA
adds a new section 512 to the Copyright Act to create four new limitations on liability
for copyright infringement by online service providers. A service provider bases these
limitations on the following four categories of conduct:

Oo Transitory communications

oO System caching

o The user-directed storage of information on systems or networks

o Information location tools

Module 01 Page 109 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

New section 512 also includes special rules concerning the application of these
limitations to nonprofit educational institutions.

Title Ill: COMPUTER MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR: Title Ill of the DMCA allows the owner
of a copy of a program to make reproductions or adaptations when necessary to use the
program in conjunction with a computer. The amendment permits the owner or lessee
of a computer to make or to authorize the making of a copy of a computer program in
the course of maintaining or repairing that computer.

Title IV: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS: Title IV contains six miscellaneous provisions.
The first provision announces the Clarification of the Authority of the Copyright Office;
the second grants exemption for the making of “ephemeral recordings”; the third
promotes study by distance education; the fourth provides an exemption for Nonprofit
Libraries and Archives; the fifth allows Webcasting Amendments to the Digital
Performance Right in Sound Recordings, and, finally, the sixth provision addresses
concerns about the ability of writers, directors and screen actors to obtain residual
payments for the exploitation of motion pictures in situations where the producer is no
longer able to make these payments.

Title V: PROTECTION OF CERTAIN ORIGINAL DESIGNS: Title V of the DMCA, entitles the
Vessel Hull Design Protection Act (VHDPA). This act creates a new system for protecting
the original designs of certain useful articles”’that make the article attractive or
distinctive in appearance. For purposes of the. VHDPA, “useful articles” are limited to the
hulls (including the decks) of vessels nodtenger than 200 feet.

The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISIMA)

Source: https://csrc.nist.gov

The Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 was enacted to produce several key
security standards and guidelines required by Congressional legislation. The FISMA provides a
comprehensive framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security controls over
information resources that support federal operations and assets. It requires each federal
agency to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide program to provide information
security for the information and information systems that support the operations and assets of
the agency, including those provided or managed by another agency, contractor, or another
source. The FISMA framework includes:

Standards for categorizing information and information systems by mission impact

Standards for the minimum security requirements for information and information
systems

Guidance for selecting appropriate security controls for information systems

Guidance for assessing security controls in information systems and determining their
effectiveness

Guidance for the security authorization of information systems

Module 01 Page 110 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

48 Mo01|Idntrouductlioento Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
GDPR regulation was put into effect on May 25, 2018 and one of the most stringent privacy and security laws globally

The GDPR will levy harsh fines against those who violate its privacy and security standards, with penalties reaching tens of millions of euros

GDPR Data Protection Principles

« Lawfulness, fairness, and transparency: Processing must be lawful, fair, and transparent to the data subject

* Purpose limitation: You must process data for the legitimate purposes specified explicitly to the data subject when you collected it

* Data minimization: You should collect and process only as much data as necessary for the purposes specified

* Accuracy: You must keep personal data accurate and up to date

« Storage limitation: You may only store personally identifying data for as long as necessary for the specified purpose
« Integrity and confidentiality: Processing must be done in such a way as to ensure appropriate security, integrity, and

confidentiality (e.g., by using encryption)

* Accountability: The data controller is responsible for demonstrating GDPR compliance with all these principles

https://gdpr.eu

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rghts Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)

Source: https://gdpr.eu

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDRR)”is one of the most stringent privacy and
security laws globally. Though it was drafted and passed by the European Union (EU), it imposes
obligations onto organizations anywhere;/.so long as they target or collect data related to
people in the EU. The regulation was put mnto effect on May 25, 2018. The GDPR will levy harsh
fines against those who violate its privacy and security standards, with penalties reaching tens
of millions of euros.

With the GDPR, Europe signifies its firm stance on data privacy and security when more people
are entrusting their data with cloud services, and breaches are a daily occurrence. The
regulation itself is extensive, far-reaching, and relatively light on specifics, making GDPR
compliance a daunting prospect, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).

GDPR Data Protection Principles

The GDPR includes seven protection and accountability principles outlined in Article 5.1-2:

= Lawfulness, fairness, and transparency: Processing must be lawful, fair, and transparent
to the data subject.

= Purpose limitation: You must process data for the legitimate purposes specified
explicitly to the data subject when you collected it.

= Data minimization: You should collect and process only as much data as necessary for
the purposes specified.

=" Accuracy: You must keep personal data accurate and up to date.

Module 01 Page 111 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

= Storage limitation: You may only store personally identifying data for as long as
necessary for the specified purpose.

= Integrity and confidentiality: Processing must be done in such a way as to ensure
appropriate security, integrity, and confidentiality (e.g., by using encryption).

= Accountability: The data controller is responsible for demonstrating GDPR compliance
with all of these principles.

Module 01 Page 112 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

49 Module 01| Introtdo Euthiccatl Hiaockning EC-Council CEH”

Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA)

¢ The DPA 2018 sets out the framework for data protection law in sees
the UK * The DPA protects individuals concerning the

processing of personal data, in particular by:

Requiring personal data to be processed
lawfully and fairly, based on the data
subject’s consent or another specified

¢ It updates and replaces the Data Protection Act 1998 and act
came into effect on 25 May, 2018

Conferring rights on the data subject to
obtain information about the processing of
personal data and to require inaccurate

Ne personal data to be rectified, and
¢ The DPA is an act to make provision for the regulation of the

processing of information relating to individuals; to make * Conferring functions on the
provision in connection with the Information Commissioner’s Commissioner, giving the holder of that
functions under specific regulations relating to information; to office responsibility to monitor and enforce
make provision for a direct marketing code of practice, and their provisions
connected purposes

https://www.legislation.gov.uk

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA)

Source: https://www.legislation.gov.uk

The DPA 2018 sets out the framework for data,protection law in the UK. It updates and replaces
the Data Protection Act 1998 and came intoveffect on 25 May, 2018. It was amended on 01
January, 2021 by regulations under the. European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 to reflect the
UK’s status outside the EU.

The DPA is an act to make provision for the regulation of the processing of information relating
to individuals; to make provision in connection with the Information Commissioner’s functions
under specific regulations relating to information; to make provision for a direct marketing code
of practice, and connected purposes.

The DPA also sets out separate data protection rules for law enforcement authorities, extends
data protection to some other areas such as national security and defense, and sets out the
Information Commissioner’s functions and powers.

Protection of personal data

1. The DPA protects individuals concerning the processing of personal data, in particular
by:

a. Requiring personal data to be processed lawfully and fairly, based on the data
subject’s consent or another specified basis,

b. Conferring rights on the data subject to obtain information about the processing of
personal data and to require inaccurate personal data to be rectified, and

c. Conferring functions on the Commissioner, giving the holder of that office
responsibility to monitor and enforce their provisions.

Module 01 Page 113 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-5
I 0
n  

t C
r e
o r

d ti
u fi

c e
t d
io  

n Et
 t h

o ic
 a
E l

t  
h H

ic a
a c

l k
 e
H r

acking

2. When carrying out functions under the GDPR, the applied GDPR, and this Act, the
Commissioner must regard the importance of securing an appropriate level of
protection for personal data, taking account of the interests of data subjects,
controllers, and others, and matters of general public interest.

Module 01 Page 114 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E@-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

50 Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council ¢|EH”
Cyber Law in Different Countries

Country Name Laws/Acts Website

Section 107 of the Copyright Law mentions the doctrine of “fair use”
https://www.copyright.gov

Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act

The Lanham (Trademark) Act (15 USC §§ 1051 - 1127) https://www.bitlaw.com

The Electronic Communications Privacy Act https://bja.ojp.gov

Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act https://bja.ojp.gov

Protect America Act of 2007 https://www.justice.gov

Privacy Act of 1974 https://www.justice.gov
United States

National Information Infrastructure Protection Act of 1996 https://www.congress.gov

Computer Security Act of 1987 https://csrc.nist.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) https://www.foia.gov

Computer Fraud and Abuse Act https://www.energy.gov

Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act https://www.ftc.gov

California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) https://oag.ca.gov

California Privacy Rights Act https://thecpra.org

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly ProhibiteFdo.r  more information,visit eccouncil.org

51 Module 01| Introduction to Bhical Hacking EC-Council CEH”
5 = zr a

Cyber Law in Different Countries (Cont’d)
Country Name Laws/Acts Website

Trade Marks Act 1995

The Patents Act 1990 https://www.legislation.gov.au
Australia

The Copyright Act 1968

Cybercrime Act 2001 https:/Awww.cybercrimelaw.net

The Copyright, Etc. and Trademarks (Offenses And Enforcement) Act 2002

Trademarks Act 1994

Computer Misuse Act 1990

The Network and Information Systems Regulations 2018
United Kingdom https://www.legislation.gov.uk

Communications Act 2003

The Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003

Investigatory Powers Act 2016

Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000

Copyright Law of the People’s Republic of China (Amendments on October 27, 2001)
China http://www.npc.gov.cn

Trademark Law of the People's Republic of China (Amendments on October 27, 2001)

ss The Patents (Amendment) Act, 1999, Trade Marks Act, 1999, The Copyright Act, 1957 https://www.ipindia.gov.in
ndia

Information Technology Act https://www.meity.gov.in

Germany Section 202a. Data Espionage, Section 303a. Alteration of Data, Section 303b. Computer Sabotage https:/Awww.cybercrimelaw.net

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Module 01 Page 115 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

52 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council ¢|EH”
Cyber Law in Different Countries (Cont’d)

Country Name Laws/Acts Website

Italy Penal Code Article 615 ter https://www.cybercrimelaw.net

Japan The Trademark Law (Law No. 127 of 1959) https://www.iip.or.jp

Copyright Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-42), Trademarks Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. T-13), Canadian
Canada Criminal Code Section 342.1 https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca

Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) https://www.priv.gc.ca

Singapore Computer Misuse Act https://sso.agc.gov.sg

Trademarks Act 194 of 1993 http://www.cipc.co.za
South Africa

Copyright Act of 1978 https://www.wipo.int

Copyright Act (amended up to Act No. 19597 of August 8, 2023) https://www.wipo.int
South Korea

Industrial Design Protection Act https://www.kipo.go.kr

Copyright Law, 30/06/1994 https://www.wipo.int
Belgium

Computer Hacking https://www.cybercrimelaw.net

Brazil Brazilian General Data Protection Law (LGPD) https://iapp.org

Hong Kong Article 139 of the Basic Law https://www.basiclaw.gov.hk

Philippines Republic Act No. 10175 https://lawphil.net

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Cyber Law in Different Countries

Cyberlaw or Internet law refers to any laws that dealwith protecting the Internet and other
online communication technologies. Cyberlaw covers topics such as Internet access and usage,
privacy, freedom of expression, and jurisdiction. Cyber laws provide an assurance of the
integrity, security, privacy, and confidentiality-of information in both governmental and private
organizations. These laws have become prominent due to the increase in Internet usage around
the world. Cyber laws vary by jurisdiction and country, so implementing them is quite
challenging. Violating these laws results in punishments ranging from fines to imprisonment.

Country Name Laws/Acts Website

Section 107 of the Copyright Law mentions the doctrine of
“fair use” https://www.copyright.gov

Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act

The Lanham (Trademark) Act (15 USC §§ 1051 - 1127) https://www.bitlaw.com

The Electronic Communications Privacy Act https://bja.ojp.gov

Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act https://bja.ojp.gov
United States

Protect America Act of 2007 https://www.justice.gov

Privacy Act of 1974 https://www.justice.gov

National Information Infrastructure Protection Act of 1996 https://www.congress.gov

Computer Security Act of 1987 https://csrc.nist.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) https://www.foia.gov

Computer Fraud and Abuse Act https://www.energy.gov

Module 01 Page 116 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act https://www.ftc.gov

California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) https://oag.ca.gov

California Privacy Rights Act of 2020 https://thecpra.org

Trademarks Act 1995

The Patents Act 1990 https://www.legislation.gov.au
Australia

The Copyright Act 1968

Cybercrime Act 2001 https://www.cybercrimelaw.net

The Copyright, Etc. and Trademarks (Offenses and
Enforcement) Act 2002

Trademarks Act 1994

Computer Misuse Act 1990

The Network and Information Systems Regulations 2018
United Kingdom https://www.legislation.gov.uk

Communications Act 2003

The Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive)
Regulations 2003

Investigatory Powers Act 2016

Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000

Copyright Law of the People’s Republic,of China
(Amendments on October 27, 2001)

China http://www.npc.gov.cn
Trademark Law of the People's Republic of China
(Amendments on October 27, 2001)

The Patents (Amendment) Act, 1999, Trade Marks Act, 1999, Bef curtain Nea al anil
wane The Copyright Act, 1957 Be eee:

Information Technology Act https://www.meity.gov.in

Section 202a. Data Espionage, Section 303a. Alteration of ,
German y Data, Section 303b. Computer Sabotage httppss:: //www..ccyyb ercrimelaw.net

Italy Penal Code Article 615 ter https://www.cybercrimelaw.net

Japan The Trademark Law (Law No. 127 of 1959) https://www.iip.or.jp

Copyright Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-42), Trademarks Act (R.S.C., 2 amr
1985, c. T-13), Canadian Criminal Code Section 342.1 httppsa:y/s/l awaies -loilels .justiSHEcE e.gc.ca

Canada
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents ee ee ee

Act (PIPEDA) os ‘PIIV-BE-
Singapore Computer Misuse Act https://sso.agc.gov.sg

Trademarks Act 194 of 1993 http://www.cipc.co.za
South Africa

Copyright Act of 1978 https://www.wipo.int

Copyright Act (amended up to Act No. 19597 of August 8,
https://www.wipo.int

South Korea 2023)

Industrial Design Protection Act https://www.kipo.go.kr

Module 01 Page 117 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Copyright Law, 30/06/1994 https://www.wipo.int
Belgium

Computer Hacking https://www.cybercrimelaw.net

Brazil Brazilian General Data Protection Law (LGPD) https://iapp.org

Hong Kong Article 139 of the Basic Law https://www. basiclaw.gov.hk

Philippines Republic Act No. 10175 https://lawphil.net

Table 1.7: Cyber Law in Different Countries

Module 01 Page 118 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by EG-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.



Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Exam 312-50 Certified Ethical Hacker
Introduction to Ethical Hacking

53 Module 01| Introduction to Ethical Hacking EC-Council CEH”

Module Summary

* This module discussed elements of information security, information security attacks,
and information warfare

* It also discussed hacking concepts and hacker classes

* This module also covered ethical hacking concepts such as the scope and limitations
of ethical hacking, skills, and along with Al-driven ethical hacking in detail

* It discussed various hacking methodologies and frameworks including CEH ethical
hacking framework, cyber kill chain methodology, MITRE ATT&CK framework, and
diamond model for intrusion analysis

* It discussed information security controls such as defense-in-depth, risk management,
cyber threat intelligence, threat modeling, incident management process, and Al and
ML

* This module ended with a detailed discussion of various information security acts and
laws from around the world

* The next module will go into detail about how attackers, as well as ethical hackers and
pen testers, perform footprinting to collect information about the target of an
evaluation before an attack or audit

Copyright © EC- Council. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited. For more information, visit eccouncil.org

Module Summary

This module has discussed elements of information security, information security attacks, and
information warfare. It also discussed hacking coneepts and hacker classes. This module closely
examined ethical hacking concepts such as itsscope and limitations and the skills of an ethical
hacker along with Al-driven ethical hacking.)it has covered various hacking methodologies and
frameworks including CEH ethical hacking framework, cyber kill chain methodology, MITRE
ATT&CK framework, and diamond model for intrusion analysis. It also covered information
security controls such as defense-in-depth, risk management, cyber threat intelligence, threat
modeling, incident management process, and Al and ML. Finally, this module ended with a
detailed discussion of various information security acts and laws.

The next module will examine how attackers, as well as ethical hackers and pen testers,
perform footprinting to collect information about their target before an attack or audit.

Module 01 Page 119 Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Copyright © by E€-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.